THE PORTRAIT
IT WAS a clear and mild afternoon in the early part of
May. William Leche had just parted from a friend, in whose company he had dined at one of the newly opened summer restaurants, and was now promenading up and down alone without any objective point. He was not in his gayest humor. He was not thirty-four, yet the thought recurred to him ever oftener that he was beginning to be old. The throng of humanity which surrounded him became daily more uninteresting to him. He grew more and more indifferent to new thoughts, new books, new acquaintances, and among old friends he began to be laconic. Nothing was as it used to be. Spring had not the same color and freshness as in his student days, Moselle wine did not glitter with the same pale and captivating sheen it had then. It was an old story, as he well knew; he needed only to save himself in time, to seek a haven before it was too late.
He had gone out in the direction of Skeppsholm past the Grand Hotel, carelessly following the current of the crowd. There were many people in motion, all wearing light-colored spring costumes, the fresh and the faded being intermingled. An artisan’s family with a baby-carriage —William’s pet aversion—in front went past him and contrived in the process to run a wheel into him; the father raised his hat in apology. The gulls on the river measured the air with wide calm wing beats. From the Skeppsholm bridge came the clatter of wagons and the jangle of iron pil
ings which were being unloaded. A steamer came out from the dock amid hurrahing and handkerchief-waving. In one of the large windows of the Café Oriental sat a group of William’s acquaintances—an author, a painter, a couple of bank clerks. They greeted him and motioned for him to come in, but he smiled politely, shook his head and went on. When he had got out a little way on the Skeppsholm bridge, he stopped and turned. Where should he take refuge for the afternoon ?
He felt no desire to go home. All his windows faced to the north; when he wasn’t working he was always tortured by the dry, cold blue-gray afternoon light in his rooms. It gave a frigid and empty effect. The many souvenirs from his travels which he had spread out over all the walls and furniture seemed to him dead and meaningless, they increased the impression of emptiness by making his home look like a museum. He might smoke a cigar and talk an hour away with one of his friends. But with which of them? Besides, it was not likely that any of them would be sitting at home such a fine afternoon to wait for him. Or why not pay a call on Fru Richardt? There at least he could be fairly sure of being welcome, if he found her in.
He decided on the last alternative and only wished with all his heart that he might find the lady at home; in the opposite event he felt he should have an intolerable evening. William had visited at Fru Annie Richardt’s house for some years. When he had made her acquaintance she had just become a widow, sold her husband’s estate at Lindebygård and moved to Stockholm, which was her
native place. Especially in the two last years he had been a frequent and much appreciated guest in her home, so that it had gradually become a cherished place of refuge when the street, the café, or the theater got on his nerves. Her company had become more and more a necessity to him. Her open and limpid glance, her soft voice with its calm well modulated cadences, her delicate unforced tone of good breeding, and the whole atmosphere of refreshing quietude which was hers—all this had of late, almost without his noticing it, become indispensable to him. He had accustomed himself to think of her spacious salon with its brightly colored furniture as the retreat where he could seek shelter and shade, until this became a habit which it would assuredly have cost him a painful effort to break.
Fru Richardt lived midway up Sture Street. On his way he went into a confectionery shop on Sture Square to buy some candied almonds for Märta, her nine-year-old daughter. Huddled in a small sofa in the darkest corner of the shop were two young girls of his social set, who were consuming cakes with such an appetite that they seemed not to have looked at food all day. William spoke to them, got his almonds, and went out. When he reached the sidewalk, it struck him that a year or so ago he had certainly been quite badly in love with one of them. But with which ? Both were blondes with blue eyes. Was it the one in black or was it she of the light-colored cloak with the tippet ? He decided for the one in black and went into a neighboring flower booth to get a white Malmaison rose and some dark pansies for Fru Annie.
On Sture Street the crowd of promenaders thronged down along the row of houses; William chose the freer sidewalk on the side of Humlegård Park. A tender green had already begun to fill out the thin translucent net of boughs on the younger trees; the older ones, the veterans of the avenues, were still standing with black and naked contours. Swarms of children were playing on the sand piles and in the walks.
William’s thoughts set sail for the same port around which they had circled so often of late. There was ultimately only one way to escape the vexations of café life and make a compromise with the baby-carriages: an ordered life, a tranquilized existence; calm, sunny days, divided between work and rest; evenings in the dusk, before the fire, with his head on her knee. And no strained efforts after fervid erotics; he was past the age for that. While he was stopping to look at some clumps of crocuses with their white, yellow, and violet blossoms spread here and there across the lawn, he could not refrain from a smile that was at once melancholy and ironic. He had always mistrusted his own faculty of initiative.
He crossed at the middle of the street, went in the door, climbed the stairs and rang. Yes, Fru Richardt was home. This he had hardly dared to hope; he felt himself convinced that in compensation some other annoyance was going to intervene and spoil his evening.
He stepped into the salon; no one was there. Märta was in the next room tinkling at an étude. When she saw him, she ran over to him directly and with practised hand took possession of her almonds, which William had unsuccess
fully tried to conceal behind his back. When she had got them, she curtsied in a manner at once arch and well bred and in ten minutes made an end of the whole packet. She then returned to her étude.
William placed his flowers in a narrow little vase on a table, while at the same time he remained standing, as he had often stood before, in front of a large oil portrait of Fru Annie’s late husband, the lieutenant and landed proprietor Johan Richardt. It was a virile and powerful head, rather pale in complexion, with hard, energetic features; the narrow but bright red lips, however, gave the face a stamp of full-blooded and imperative sensuality. The artist, no doubt with deliberate intention, had given the eyes that wide and relentlessly pursuing glance which recalls the portraiture of Roslin and his contemporaries—a mocking or sinister glance, from which the beholder cannot escape, no matter where in the room he may be, and which he seems to feel in his back when he turns away from the canvas.
Fru Annie came in and greeted him cordially. The trend of her features was aristocratic without being strictly regular; her coloring had a youthful freshness without being either red or pale. Her eyes swam gray and tranquil under a pair of not very dark, but delicately and firmly marked eyebrows. She immediately noticed William’s flowers and clasped them to her breast with a little cry of gratification.
“How beautiful you are, Fru Annie!—this evening as always.”
In the first moment William could think of nothing else to say. The compliment was, moreover, too frank and direct to be offensive. Fru Annie sat down in a sofa corner with a little silk cushion under her neck, her feet on a hassock, and William took a seat on an ottoman. The conversation was easy and unconstrained as always; William could not conceal a certain lowness of spirits—he himself hardly knew about what—which with him passed over into a slight absentmindedness. Fru Richardt did not fail to notice this.
“You are often depressed, Herr Leche, and you are so this evening. . . . Yes, don’t deny it. I’ve never been able to understand why. You are still young and in good health, you don’t have to worry about making your living, you have an occupation that interests you—or doesn’t it ?—and you have plenty of diversion.”
“Oh, I try to amuse myself at least. . . .”
“Try. ... To be frank, Herr Leche, your complaint . . . at bottom it’s surely just a sort of mischievousness you’ve devised to make you interesting. Oh, if I were in your position. . . . How I envy you, you men, with all your freedom and privileges!”
“For instance the privilege of wooing. Apropos of that, why shouldn’t we two get married, Fru Annie? ... I mean it seriously, why shouldn’t you and I marry ?”
William did not know himself how the words crossed his lips; he felt that he had grown very pale.
Several seconds passed. Fru Annie smiled wistfully, almost sadly.
“No, Herr Leche. . . . I'm sorry, but that cannot be."
A pause. Märta plodded along conscientiously with her étude. A canary trilled in the next room.
“But why, why?”
“Oh, I’m not young any more. You should look for a young wife, who can hold you captive more permanently than I."
“That’s a weak evasion, Fru Annie. You mean something different from what you say. Do you love me ?”
He took her hand and pressed it hard. She let him keep it, confused for the moment. However, she quickly recovered her self-possession, freed her hand discreetly from his, and replied, “I think I should be able to love you, unless. . . . No, it can never be."
She had tears in her eyes, and her voice trembled a little.
“You would only laugh at me," she resumed with an effort at a smile, “if I told you the reason. It’s such a commonplace story, and perhaps a stupid story at bottom . . . perhaps a sad one too . . . but that can’t be helped now. ... I promised my husband on his deathbed never to love another."
“Promised never to love. . . . But that’s absurd. That was madness.”
“Madness or not, I promised.”
The clamor from the street pressed in through the balcony door, which was ajar. The awnings, which were lowered to keep out the afternoon sun, threw an orange light over the room, a light that grew warmer and darker as the sun descended.
“If I could only make you understand me," she went on. “Let me tell you a little about my marriage. That may perhaps clear things up a little."
William shifted over into a rocking-chair and listened, while he gazed fixedly with a certain bitterness at the portrait on the wall.
“You have probably known for a long while that my marriage was by no means happy. I was very young when the match was made, and besides I was more than a little in love with the impressive Lieutenant Richardt.... He had already lived with a number of women, and he had a bit of the Don Juan glory which always turns a young girl’s head. One gilds one’s schoolgirl infatuation with the dream of making the chosen hero a new man and so forth . . . you understand. Ah, but it was he who was by way of making a new person of me instead.”
She was still for a moment, while she thoughtfully surveyed the portrait, which bored its wide-open eyes into hers.
“Still it was a happy time, that first year at Lindebygård . . . in spite of everything. But afterwards .... Soon after the wedding Richardt resigned from his regiment; he was going to devote himself to agriculture. It wasn’t long, however, that he could put up with living quietly on his estate. There were endless journeys . . . business trips ... to Stockholm, to Copenhagen, to the Continent. Months passed without his writing me a single letter. And I ... I was alone at Lindebygård . . . forgotten, deserted. The pitying faces of the servants, the intrusive questions of the neighbors. ... I wrote to my mother,
who was still alive then. At first I struggled to hide my unhappiness, so as not to worry her unnecessarily, but in the long run I found this impossible; I wrote letters that were filled with all my despair. She answered that I ought to try to make the best of my lot and that things would surely be better in time. Autumn passed . . . the old linden avenue, where I used to go back and forth for hours when I was not kept indoors by wind and rain, grew faded and thin. For whole nights I would lie awake and listen to the rattle of the weathervane or to two branches of a tree outside the window, as the storm rubbed them together with a wailing sound. . . . Winter came. I shut myself in, took a book, and tried to read. I often turned page after page without an idea of what was on them; the letters danced before my eyes.
“Then he came home, quiet and unconcerned. A little paler only . . . even paler than before. At first I almost thought everything might still be well. Märta was born just at that time, and Richard was as attentive a husband as in our happiest days, told reminiscences of his travels and excused himself as well as he could for his remissness in writing. But the peace was not of long duration. His friendliness grew more and more nonchalant. . . . Oh, Herr Leche, you may believe that it is not with a light heart I sit here and tell you all my humiliations.”
“Dear, dear Fru Annie. . . .”
“He sought my company less and less; we met at mealtimes. He began to go about on intimate terms with the landed proprietors and other people of station in the district. There were men’s parties to infinity, at our place
and others . . . drinking bouts with gambling and uproarious laughter till far into the morning. . . . You know how such things can get in a country district where there is hardly any other amusement. Oh, what a life! . . . We had our excellent overseer to thank that things held together at all. Richardt drank heavily in those years, and when he was drunk he often became brutal . . . otherwise he was a gentleman, in spite of all.
"Years passed ... six years, in that way. Richardt kept on making trips every now and then, and I soon got used to regarding his travels as brighter intervals in my life. When he was home, the nights were a continual riot and the days were just as long as in his absence . . . oh, how long! . . . Time after time he got letters with women’s handwriting on the envelopes. He opened them and looked them over in my presence, and sometimes he would leave them on a table or a chair, as if in a fit of absentmindedness. I am certain he did it intentionally. It amused him to flaunt his infidelity openly in my face.”
Fru Annie leaned back her head and closed her eyes. Märta stole through the room as silently as a little mouse; she had finished her étude and was going out on the balcony to lean her head over the railing and look at the stream of people. Fru Annie resumed her narrative in a lower voice:
“The story had an abrupt ending. His drinking companions brought him home one night insensible, his head covered with blood. It was a stormy night. His horse had been frightened by the thunder, they said, had run away and thrown him. He always used to ride to and from his
parties in the neighborhood. For two days his mind wandered, he talked mostly about all his love affairs. He spoke my name sometimes . . . among the rest. On the evening of the second day he recovered his consciousness. I was not to leave him an instant, he said. I sat at his bedside all the time . . . the whole night; he held my hand in his. Sometimes his mind strayed, the next instant it was perfectly clear. Towards morning the death struggle came. He raised himself in bed ... he stared at me with wide-open eyes. He seized me by the wrist. ... I can still feel his feverish hand, a hand of glowing iron. . . . ‘Annie,’ he whispered, ‘you are mine . . . you must never belong to anyone else. You must promise never to love another . . . never, do you hear!’ I sank on my knees before his glance ... a constraining, imperative glance.”
“And you promised ?”
“I promised by all that was holy.”
William could not take his eyes from the portrait. A miser of love, he thought; a greedy, insatiable collector, who with his jealous avarice wanted to take the best of his treasure into the earth with him.
“What is your opinion of a promise given to a dead man, Herr Leche?”
“I think, Fru Annie, that Herr Johan Richardt is sleeping so deeply there in the churchyard out at Lindebygård that our happiness will hardly disturb him.”
The portrait stared at him with alert eyes.
Fru Annie shook her head mournfully.
“That’s how you think and act, you men; but not we. You can snatch at happiness . . . you haven't our miserable, timid feminine conscience.”
William absently turned several pages of an English religious book which he had taken from a shelf. Fru Annie rose and paced the room.
“No, no, no. ... I should never dare!—And besides, it’s not only that . . . not only the promise. Can you understand it when I tell you that there are days when I think I love him yet, when I feel I can never love another, when I find it unthinkable that one should be able to love anyone but him . . . Johan Richardt!”
She had come to a stand in front of the portrait.
William muttered almost inaudibly, “Yes, you are right.
... It is such men that women love best.”
“And I assure you . . . but you’ll only laugh at my childishness . . . there are days when I choose my dress to suit his taste, days when I pay my respects to him in black and red because that was his favorite color combination. . . . Oh yes, I forgive you for smiling at me.”
“No, Fru Annie, I’m not smiling . . . not this evening.”
It had grown dark. Fru Richardt raised the awnings and opened the balcony doors wide; the evening air streamed in light and cool, steeped in the scent from the flower-beds of the Humlegård. The sky was a transparent blue behind the rows of houses on the far side of the park. The trees lay cool and hushed on the shining twilight of the spring evening; it seemed as if the old lindens leaned their heads together. Lamps began to be lighted down in the city, they twinkled up one by one with a dim glow which
struggled with the fading daylight. The murmur of humanity decreased. A tram rolled by, ringing its bell. . . . Several gentlemen came talking and laughing out of a cigar booth and went off, their footsteps ringing hard on the pavement.
William got up to go. Fru Richardt invited him to stay and have tea, but he declined; he was to meet a couple of friends down at the Oriental. He pressed a kiss on Fru Annie’s hand at parting and patted Märta on the cheek; then as he neared the door he came near making, quite instinctively, a formal bow to Herr Johan Richardt.