The History Teacher
In the café. At lunch time.
It is getting dark early; winter darkness. Snow and sleet are coming down, and one bent, black silhouette after another slips past the cafe's big dark window in the busy lunch-time rush, just as once long ago the fantastic figures in the nursery home-made lantern-show were passed back and forth across a sheet of oiled silk by an invisible hand.
There is so-and-so. How he has aged lately!
There he goes. How much longer will he be able to keep going?
And there she goes... Did she really bother to make herself up to go out on a day like this?
Just now my old history teacher went past, white-haired, frail and bent. I suppose he must have been retired a long time now. How worn out and broken-down he looked! When I saw him slip past the window with his bent legs and his crooked back I felt as if my own body, affected by some mysterious sympathetic force, were ready to go down like a knife blade sinking into its sheath.
Yes, my old history teacher... What deep awesome respect I felt when as a little boy I came to school for the first time and saw his handsome, friendly snow-white head, for he was white even in those days. And then my surprise and bewilderment, which was mixed with contempt, when I came up several years later into the senior school where he taught and got to know him better. For there was no teacher in the whole school we could play up so recklessly and insolently as him. How did it come about?
Fundamentally, that is how it had always been. He had probably realized right from the start that he was incapable of inspiring fear. And so, by way of compensation, he had wanted to make himself more popular. The method he had chosen was to try to make his lessons as funny and entertaining as possible. He paid just about no attention at all to the syllabus; he told stories, drew pictures of popes and emperors on the board and mimed some of the greatest moments of history. He wanted people to laugh, and they did. His lessons were endless paroxysms of laughter. But it was not his jokes the boys laughed at, for very few of us understood them; it was the man himself. Instead of being our mentor he had become our court fool . In his class you could get away with anything. We picked teazle-heads, took them into the classroom and made his lesson into a pitched battle. And it didn’t help when the teacher appealed to us not to throw them at him, whatever we did, because precisely that was the best fun of all, especially if you could get them in his hair. And when one day it got known that the old bachelor intended to get married, we prepared during first break a speech of congratulation in the most appalling Latin containing some thoroughly improper pieces of advice for one entering the married state, and at the beginning of the next history lesson this speech was read out with great solemnity by the form prefect...
Not even with the Greek master, who was deaf and nearly blind; no, not even with a silly little trainee teacher would we have dared to go so far.
But then there was another thing: he had financial problems and time and again unsavoury-looking people came looking for him in the classroom with pressing business. And an unfailing source of amusement was the old teacher’s mortal terror each time somebody knocked at the door and the boy who went to open it came back with the inevitable news:
‘There is a gentleman outside who would like a word with you, sir.’
And so one day - oh, I remember it like yesterday; it was a November day like today and it got dark early and there was rain and snow - one day it happened, that in one and the same history
lesson two such calls came, one shortly after the other. Our joy was indescribable, but the teacher seemed depressed. He made a few attempts to get into his usual joking style, but that day it just wouldn’t work. It started to get boring; somebody had to think of something.
Suddenly the form prefect stood up - although this time nobody had heard a knock - and he went and opened the door for a third time. A moment later he came back, perfectly serious:
‘There is a gentleman outside who wishes to speak to you, sir.’
Then he turned to us and winked, and we understood the joke at once. The form prefect was a bright fellow, he was the only one of us who could have thought up such an idea.
‘For Christ’s sake!’ cried the teacher, almost in tears, and he ran out into the corridor, his coattails flapping round his legs.
There was nobody there, of course.
But the teacher was white when he came back. He made a vain attempt to continue the anecdote he had just started. But his voice gave out. Shattered, he collapsed into his yellow-stained high-backed chair and wept.
That was the end for the old man. He saw financial ruin ahead, and now this... His world fell apart. There was nothing he could do but cry. And so he cried.