A Dog without a Master
A man died, and when he was dead nobody looked after his black dog. The dog mourned for him long and bitterly. But he did not lie down and die on his master’s grave, possibly because he did not know where it was, and possibly also because he was at heart a young, happy dog and considered that life still held something for him.
There are two kinds of dogs: dogs that have a master and dogs that do not. Outwardly the difference is not very great; a masterless dog can be just as fat as the others, even fatter. No, the difference lies elsewhere. Man is, for a dog, the infinite, Providence. A master to obey, to follow, to depend on: that is, so to speak, the meaning of a dog’s life. He does not have his master in his thoughts every minute of the day, of course, and he does not always follow closely at his heels; oh no, he runs about intent on business of his own, he sniffs at the comers of houses, makes the acquaintance of other dogs, gets hold of a bone if one comes his way and concerns himself with many things; but the instant his master whistles all this goes out of his doggy mind faster than the whip of Jesus drove the moneylenders out of the Temple. For he knows: one thing is needful. And he forgets his house-comer and his bone and his doggy friends and rushes to his master.
The dog, whose master died and was buried without the dog’s knowing where, mourned him for a long time; but as the days went by and nothing happened that might remind him of his master, he forgot him. On the street where his master had lived he could no longer find any trace of his scent. When he played in the grass with another dog it often happened that a whistle cut
through the air, and in that instant his friend was gone like the wind. Then he pricked up his ears; but no whistle sounded like his master’s. And so he forgot him, and he forgot still more: he forgot that he had ever had a master. He forgot that there had ever been a time when he would have thought it not possible for a dog to live without a master. He became what might be called a dog that has seen better days, but only in an inner sense, because outwardly he got along quite well. He lived as a dog can live: he stole a good meal now and then in the market square and got beaten, and had love affairs, and lay down to sleep when he was tired. He made friends and enemies. One day he gave a thorough beating to a dog that was weaker than himself, and another day he was badly thrashed himself by one that was stronger. Early in the morning he could be seen running along his master’s street, where out of habit he still spent most of his time. He would trot straight ahead looking as if he had some important business to attend to, sniff in passing at another dog, but without bothering to follow up the acquaintance, then increase his speed, but all at once sit down to scratch behind his ear with feverish energy. The next moment he would leap up and dash across the street to chase a ginger cat into a cellar window and then, resuming his businesslike manner, continue on his way and disappear round the comer.
Thus his day passed; and one year followed closely on the heels of another, and he grew old without noticing it.
It was a dark, cloudy evening, wet and cold, and there was a shower now and then. The old dog had been down town all day on an expedition. He went up the street slowly, limping a little. He stopped a few times to shake his black coat, which with the years had become flecked with grey around the head and neck. As usual he went and sniffed first to the right, then to the left; and he made a detour into a gateway, and when he came out he had another dog with him. The next moment a third joined them. They were young dogs, and frisky, and they wanted him to play with them; but he was in a bad mood, and it was also starting to rain very heavily. Then a whistle pierced the air, a long, sharp whistle. The old dog looked at the two young ones, but they did not react: it was not one of their masters that was whistling. The old dog without a master pricked up his ears; he felt suddenly so strange. There was another whistle, and the old dog jumped in bewilderment first one way and then the other. It was his master that was whistling, and he had to follow! For the third time somebody whistled, just as sharply and persistently as before. Where is he then, which direction? How did I come to be parted from my master? And when did it happen, yesterday or the day before, or perhaps just a little while ago? And what did my master look like, and what sort of scent did he have, and where is he, where is he? He ran around and sniffed at all the passersby, but none of them was his master, and none of them wanted to be. Then he turned and ran along the street; at the comer he stopped and looked in all directions. His master was not there. Then he bounded back along the street as fast as he could go; the mud splashed about him and the rain poured off his coat. At every comer he stopped, but nowhere was his master to be found. Then he sat down at a cross-roads and stretched his shaggy head up at the sky and howled.
Have you seen, have you heard a forgotten, masterless dog when he stretches his head up at the sky and howls, howls? The other dogs slink quietly away with their tails between their legs; for they cannot comfort him and they cannot help him.