WITH THE CURRENT
i
NO, Gabriel Mortimer had not been himself since he had married. Everyone said so. Some few said it with a touch of regret in their voices, but most of them said it approvingly.
In his youth he had been known for various eccentricities. The most conspicuous of these, and that, too, which in its time had aroused the greatest indignation among his family, was his early and persistent determination not to be anything. He read much but never with the idea of taking any examination. He traveled and, however irregularly, wrote diaries of his spiritual development, as intelligent young men sometimes did at that time. To the consternation of all he declared without reservation that he considered he had reached a sufficiently high stage of being to pass the time without needing to take refuge in any diversion of the sort known as conscientious and regular duties. Wasn’t the world full of chief justices, journalists, and company directors? And wasn’t it an act of sheer ingratitude toward destiny, which had given him a good income, to aggravate the struggle for existence among his contemporaries ? In this way he got the reputation of being an irresponsible, at whom serious men shrugged their shoulders; an original, who could be tolerated because he had independent means and could entertain society with his paradoxes.
Furthermore, he was indifferent as to whether people approved of his conduct or not. He ate good dinners, had gay adventures, and read the best books. He took no special care of his health, but he never suffered particularly, for he had a strong constitution. After taking a long walk through the country in the morning and helping to bury an old aunt in the middle of the day, he could unconcernedly spend the evening at a fairly wild bachelor party and on his return put in a couple of the night hours studying some English philosopher. But if late at night the oil of his lamp began to run low, and he rolled up the curtains to let the moonlight in, it sometimes happened that the unrest in his blood drove him forth anew, while every one else was asleep, to roam the streets and squares. And if it chanced that on such a bright moonlight night he wandered along some deserted avenue, where the misty perspective seemed to lead straight out into infinity, he might suddenly stop and, his gaze enchanted by the strange ashen-white radiance, ask himself if this was the same street he had so often passed up and down in full daylight and in gloomy weather, and if these rows of silent alien houses, which the moon painted a spectral white, were really part of the same city where in daytime he was as much at home as in his own room. Had the moonlight something to say to him, something important, something which concerned his whole existence and which nevertheless he could not comprehend? Some mystery, which the daylight neither felt nor understood?
But when he awoke next day, and the morning sunlight, strong and yellow, flooded the clear pattern of the carpet,
he smiled to himself and added these delicate nocturnal shivers to the pleasures of existence.
It was in truth this question of the meaning of life that at bottom filled his day and night, but he was young and happy and therefore decided with a clear conscience to leave the solution to the indefinite future.
When, however, Gabriel Mortimer was in his twenty seventh year, his life was given a new impetus by a circumstance which he had not foreseen. The fact was that he fell seriously in love with a young girl of such a character and social position that marriage was the only way out. All the sharp satire with which in intimate circles— sometimes, too, in those less intimate—he had treated the institution of marriage could not stop him, one night on the way home from a ball, from proposing and being accepted. He now needed to increase his income by getting a salaried occupation. His future father-in-law did not indeed make this an indispensable condition of his approval—for Mortimer was in all respects a very good match—but he considered it the only sure basis for the respect which he wished to have for his prospective son-in-law. Mortimer was influenced in the same direction by the girl herself through her paradoxical assertion that she had indeed fallen in love with him precisely because he was not like the others, but on the other hand she hardly believed she could love him rightly if he wouldn’t try to become like the others. What was he to do ? In the shortest possible time Mortimer passed a tolerable examination in law, was enrolled in a government office, married, was promoted, and made himself popular with his chief and his comrades.
His married life was fairly happy. His wife had a both equable and lively disposition, and fulfilled all her connubial duties in a satisfactory manner. Gabriel became on the whole a good married man and performed his official functions with greater interest than he could have expected. On the other hand, he ceased almost entirely to occupy himself with literature, and the diaries of his spiritual development ceased of themselves; it was so hard nowadays to find anything to write in them. At the beginning of his marriage he often read aloud to his wife, but when he found that for such a purpose he must choose books that corresponded with her mental capacities, the pleasure declined. Nor did he often have the chance on his own account to dip deeply into the authors who might have interested him, for his wife seldom left him alone, she was too fond of him for that; and when they were together after dinner, she had always something to talk to him about. Besides, Mortimer very soon found that it was easier to write reports than to keep diaries, and that a regular life, divided between work, amusement, and rest, was incomparably more easy and agreeable than to live the life of moods and ideas which had heretofore been his.
Once in a while it might indeed chance that an intimation flitted past him, a suggestion that his life was in process of becoming something quite different from what he had once intended. Such moods were, however, always very transient, for if his mind ever started a longer chain of consecutive ideas, it was soon interrupted by his wife’s caresses and amiable small-talk. Nor did his marriage really correspond in all points to the previous cravings of
his youth for erotic love, hut he consoled himself with the reflection that one’s ideal is always unattainable; and furthermore, he did not omit to recall that the love affairs he had had before his marriage had availed as little—nay, even less—to give him any feeling of true satisfaction. In comparison with others, he had on the whole every reason to regard himself as fortunate. His wife was by many considered a beauty.
Besides, if once in a while—which rarely happened—he took up with the idea of comparing gain and loss in his life, it gave him a certain pleasure, whether with or against his will, to set in the plus column of the reckoning the complete approval of his friends and relations, for with the course of the years he had become altogether like other people.
In spite of this he had times when he was reserved and irritable, and thought he had failed in everything.
At such times he amused himself by calling existence an unsuccessful play, at the beginning of which one expects a thrilling plot, but which calmly proceeds to evolve into an ordinary domestic comedy. The most insignificant circumstance was then sufficient to lead his thoughts into this train. One evening he had been to the theater with his wife. It was a first-night performance. A new play had been given, a piece by an author whom he had formerly admired above all others; but he had rediscovered little of the enjoyment which the dramatist had been wont to give him. Had he grown old ? Had he been left behind ? Did he no longer appreciate the fine shades of thought and feeling for which not so many years ago his mind
had been so receptive ? That night he lay long awake. All the little meaningless events of the evening passed back and forth in his memory in ridiculously sharp details. Inconsequential faces and utterances emerged, vanished, and reappeared with baffling obstinacy. In the theater lobby he had met one of the old friends of his bachelor days, who had complained that one saw him so little nowadays. And between the acts he had run into an old school comrade, who had become a newspaper man. In his school days he had never been conspicuous for his mental attainments, and yet here he was praising just the passages of the play which Mortimer hadn’t understood. Finally his thoughts turned to what his wife had said when they got home, at just the moment when he was putting his cane into its usual corner. “I’m hungry as a wolf,” she had said. As a wolf. Wolves—ah yes. . . . They are supposed to be specially voracious animals. . . . And quite suddenly it came to his mind what a painful disappointment these creatures had given him once as a boy. One evening at Christmas time he had been walking along the street holding his father’s hand. Yes, it must have been around Christmas; at any rate there was a thaw, there were many people out, and a multitude of things in the shop windows. On Queen Street they had stood a moment in front of a great placard with blue and yellow edges, which announced that in this building Miss So-and-So was exhibiting her trained wolves. Gabriel insisted on seeing them. He begged and pleaded with his father until he got his way, and they went in. The performance began. Gabriel sat trembling with tense expectation. A fat lady with skirts much too short for her
appeared on a platform, attended by three wolves, each of which jumped five times through a barrel hoop. After this the fat lady made a deep bow and declared, “Ladies and gentlemen, the performance is over.”
At the memory of this shattered illusion, Mortimer laughed so bitterly and hard that his wife was startled from her sleep and inquired what was the matter.
n
So the time ran, and with every year that passed he grew a year older, but he hardly noticed it.
And children came: first one, then another, then still another.
Mortimer became the father of a family, and the head of a family has more important things to think of than the meaning of life and his own spiritual development. More and more he came to perceive the truth and depth of the saying that his late father-in-law, a pensioned associate judge, constantly had on his lips: Life is made up of trifles. He remembered as if it had been yesterday the day he had taken dinner with the family of his intended after he had just, with unexpected celerity, passed his law examination. The company consisted only of the judge, who was a widower, his two daughters and an elderly aunt in black. They drank a splendid old golden sherry with dessert. They sat at the table a long while, eating grapes and talking of this and that, till the judge raised his voice and concluded the conversation with his favorite axiom:
“Yes, life is made up of trifles. To do one’s duty in small and in great things is the sum total of the law. He who
does that may live in peace and never need to trouble himself with any unnecessary care, and he may go in peace to the grave.”
The old gentleman remained sitting with his hand propped on the table and his fork in the air, while he stared out into space with a prophetic expression in his glance. In the pause which followed one could hear the waitress sneeze out in the kitchen.
in
Gabriel Mortimer was taken ill.
It began with appendicitis, which after a time passed into another disorder and later into a third.
His entire existence was broken up. It was a violent upheaval, which left not a fiber of his body untouched.
For weeks his life hung on a thread.
He lay unconscious for days and nights together. He went out of his mind. He tossed about in feverish dreams. He wandered through strange regions by endless winding paths and never got home. He lost himself in the empty stairways and corridors of a hotel that seemed to be deserted, extinct. One fantasy in especial pursued him relentlessly. Early in the morning he had left home on an important errand, so important that it was a matter of life and death. On the way he was detained by a myriad of trifles, irrelevances that chance threw in his way, that had no interest for him, and yet to which it would have been improper for him to be indifferent. Evening was now coming on, it grew darker and darker, and still he was going up street and down, always being detained by inessentials:
by friends, who wished to recall to his mind a multitude of the gay adventures they had experienced together and which he couldn’t remember; and by casual acquaintances, who took him by the buttonhole to confide something important to them but meaningless to him. The darkness spread around him ever more deeply, he never got ahead, and furthermore he had forgotten where he had intended to go. ... It was this that over and over caused him to groan with anguish in his dream: he had forgotten where he had meant to go, and yet he had to get on, for it was a matter of life and death.
Sometimes he had fantasies of a religious nature. He imagined he was a minister, that women cried when he preached, and that he had led a blameless life in every way and was respected by everyone. And yet this could not help him, for he had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. He had been troubled about many things, although he knew that but one thing was needful. But what that one thing was he had forgotten, and it was the sin against the Holy Ghost that he had forgotten it.
During these weeks of fever he had lived entirely in the world of his imagination. He did not recognize those nearest to him.
There was a crisis, during which his entire being was shaken like the liquid in a medicine bottle; what had been on top sank to the bottom. And the sediment came uppermost.
But the crisis passed and he got on the road to recovery.
Pale and emaciated, he lay toying with the corner of his white sheet and staring up into the empty air. Once more
he understood what was said to him, and he recognized his wife, his children, and his friends. This reunion, however, did not seem to produce any special effect on him. It was assumed that weakness hindered him from giving expression to his feelings.
His convalescence lasted all winter.
His energies returned slowly, slowly. It was months and months before he could be up and about.
He remembered nothing of the nightmares that had persecuted him day and night during his fever, and yet his soul was in tumult from the subconscious ground swells of that troubled time. His wife found him completely indifferent to their common interests, to the children, to all the actual world that surrounded him. He spent most of the day alone, sunk in an easy chair by the window.
Alone: for as an invalid he assumed undisputed the right which in health he had been too kind-hearted to exercise with his wife, the right to insist upon solitude and silence.
He read many books during this time, especially the books that in the old times had set his thoughts moving and his blood surging. One day, when he was searching about through his effects to find an old letter that he wanted, his glance was suddenly arrested by a package of yellowed notebooks closely written. They were the diaries he had kept in his youth. He sat himself down and read them from beginning to end. From every page his former self greeted him smilingly, and he could not but smile back. At first he made an effort to regard this edition of himself as the portrait of a dead man with whom he no
longer had any intimate concern; but he soon observed, to his surprise, that it became less foreign with every page he turned.
In the quiet lake of solitude and silence where he was now spending his days and nights his former self seemed to be gradually returning to the surface.
He often sat with a mirror in his hand. He couldn’t deny himself the pleasure of fancying that illness had rejuvenated him. The fleshy wrinkles in his face had been smoothed out. His complexion had become as delicately transparent as he recalled it in his first youth. His eyes had grown bright with rest and sleep. In comparison with all this he found it unimportant that his hair had turned almost gray.
But next moment he would burst into a laugh at his childish vanity, lean back in his chair, and quickly lose himself again in the earnest contemplation of his past life. He sought for a simple point in the past which might serve as a center. He sought for something that he might call fundamental. His youth had been a premise which called for a corresponding conclusion as its necessary fulfilment, but the conclusion had always been delayed. The purpose of his life seemed broken by an interminable parenthesis, the content of which had nothing to do with the main issue. And when at last, tired and indifferent, he would have dismissed these thoughts with his old expression that life was a farce, he was immediately drawn into a new and perilous whirlpool of destructive ideas.
When one says life is a farce, one means that it isn’t serious. But one needs to have a more serious tempera
ment than the average to set up such a strict and lofty standard for existence that its seriousness collapses and becomes a joke. It is therefore seriousness which turns life into a farce, and the condition of being able to take life earnestly is to be frivolous.
He thus unconsciously let his thoughts run in a dialectic vicious circle that left him no peace.
Days and weeks passed, until outside it became spring again, while Gabriel Mortimer lay stretched on his chair, playing with thoughts and looking at the clouds which the April breezes drove past his window in ethereal flocks.
iv
Mortimer had resumed his work. His life had once more flowed into the old channels. He read the newspaper, went to the theater, mingled with society, and at the same hours as before went to and from his office. But he wasn’t the same as before. He appeared listless and distrait. He laughed on occasions when he should not have laughed, and when his comrades went into convulsions over an anecdote so that their stomachs jumped, he was sometimes so tactless as to stay unmoved. Nor did he do his work with the same exactitude as before. One day it came to light that he had filled the margin of an important official document with caricatures of his wife and his late father-in-law. His chief at last, in all friendliness, advised him, besides his regular holiday time, to take several months off in the summer for a complete rest; it was evident that his illness had told heavily on his strength and spirits. Mortimer followed the advice and took lodgings for the sum-
mer with a cousin, a provincial doctor, in a remote country district. His wife and the children stayed with relatives in a villa near Stockholm.
v
It was a sunny afternoon toward the end of August. The sun was burning with a dull bronze glow, as it declined beneath a great motionless mass of copper-edged cloud. A wide glassy-bright river meandered slowly through the landscape, hemmed in between the precipitous walls of two dark wooded heights. Out on a low promontory, where the verdure shone with a sulphur-yellow tinge in the strange illumination, a white church glittered like a lighted candle.
Around the church nestled the red roofs of the village.
Mortimer was lying on his back in a boat out on the river. In the boat he had a pair of field-glasses, a volume of Shakespeare, and a couple of fishing rods, which he had forgotten to set out.
He lay on his back and let the boat drift.
Suddenly he raised himself and looked up. Someone was calling his name.
On a rock down by the shore stood a young girl dressed entirely in red. She held her hand over her eyes to shade them from the sun and called his name:
“Where are you going to row, Herr Mortimer?”
“I don’t know—anywhere. I think I’ll drift with the current.”
The girl had blood-red lips and dark-brown hair* Her figure was slender and delicate, but her bosom, which
slowly rose and fell under her thin summer dress, swelled out almost arrogantly. Yet she was very young. Scarcely nineteen.
She leaned out over the water as far as she could and, with a moist glance in her long swimming eyes, said, “May I come along?”
Mortimer turned the boat toward the shore, but at that moment there was a rustling in the foliage, the alder boughs were bent aside, and Mortimer perceived a girl in a yellow bodice and a sea-blue skirt with white circles on it.
“No, not now,” he answered, while at the same time he exchanged greetings with the girl in blue. “But another time. Some other time perhaps you may come, but then I shall be rowing against the stream.”
“Why ? And why mayn’t I come now ? I don’t want to anyway. Nor another time either.”
With a laugh she threw her right arm around her friend’s waist.
“Why? Why do you ask why? A child can ask more than seven wise men can answer. You shouldn’t ever ask why.”
The girl in red laughed again so that the mountains echoed on the opposite side of the river. The next moment she was gone through the alders on the bank, and the girl in blue followed.
Mortimer resumed his former attitude. A couple of minutes later he raised himself on his elbows, took the field-glasses, and put them to his eyes. The girl in red was visible on a narrow path between the cultivated fields.
Their arms around each other’s waist, the two girls glided on across the landscape. To Mortimer they were like two flowers of curious form and dangerous perfume.
Now a young man came walking along the path; he evidently wanted to meet them; while he was still some distance off he swung his hat and called to them. He made the same foppish motions with his cane as if he were walking on a city street.
Mortimer laid down the glasses, smiled to himself, and let the boat drift again.
A couple of times he leaned over the gunwale. He encountered in the water the reflection of a strong sunburned man.
Hours passed. Mortimer dreamed waking dreams, while the evening sun stared straight into his eyes with the red light of a conflagration, which finally forced him to blink. Then the red light was drowned in an ocean of glimmering poisonous green.
Lucie, the parson’s niece. . . .
Red Lucie.
He had known her but a few weeks. How had he got through all the long days of the summer before he had happened upon her? And the winter, and the summer before that, and all his life ?
He could not comprehend.
It was for her he had longed all these tedious, empty years.
How had the early summer passed ? He hardly remembered. For days at a time he had roamed about in the woods.
When he was tired he had lain down to sleep among the whortleberries. He had wandered through the marshes and climbed the hills. He would spend all day on a mountain plateau that had been burned red by the sun, listening to the murmur of a forest brooklet, to bells from the nearest saeter, or the sound of two boughs rubbed together by the wind.
He seldom read and scarcely thought at all. The past, the actuality in which he had lived, had sunk away; only now and then it would rise up before him in indefinite contours, as in the midst of a dream a dim suggestion of his waking life might rise before a sleeper and disturb him with a vague consciousness that he was only dreaming.
His old existence had glided away from him. He felt himself rejuvenated, renewed.
Then came the day when he met Lucie.
He met her one evening at the parsonage. Her home was in a small town up north, and now she was to spend the latter part of the summer with her uncle, the parson, and his daughter.
Mortimer did not talk much with her, but his glances followed her everywhere. A couple of times their eyes met. When this happened the second time, her pale complexion became all at once such a bright red that the color of her dress seemed to fade. After that she avoided his glance, but Mortimer noticed that several times during the evening she looked at him furtively, when she thought he didn’t see her.
Next day he went to the woods again. But he couldn’t find any paths he had not traversed many times before.
Besides, he couldn’t understand now how he could have found any pleasure in roaming all day through the woods. It was a burning hot day. He came home, shut himself up in his room, pulled down the blinds and lay down to sleep. He dreamed of Lucie and also of another girl, the first he had ever loved; her name was Helga Wenschen and she was married. He dreamed that she and Lucie stood and laughed at him. Helga stuffed her handkerchief into her mouth as if to conceal her laughter, but Lucie laughed straight into his face.
During the following days he often went over to the parson’s. So too did the young court notary, the district judge’s assistant. The parsonage, the court-house, the apothecary’s store, and the doctor’s house were clustered together around the church.
It was a strange, uncanny sun of the dog days that had shone and glowed above the river valley these last few weeks.
The air stood still. The leaves of the aspens hung motionless. The color of the heavens cut into one’s eyes with an almost unnatural blue.
One day Mortimer was walking along the river bank. The sun burned on his back. Finally he threw himself down, half stupefied, on the grass in the shade of some alders. The insects buzzed about his head and hindered him from sleeping.
After a while he heard the sound of slow oar-strokes down on the river and the voices of girls talking in a drowsy and indolent rhythm. Mortimer raised himself on his elbows and noiselessly bent aside a branch that obscured
his view. He had recognized the voices. Gerda, the parson’s daughter, was rowing; in the stern lay Lucie with her bare arms and hands under her head. She had taken off her bodice.
She lay tranquilly with her eyes closed.
“How can you lie there half-undressed!” exclaimed Gerda, resting on her oars. “Somebody might see you.”
“There’s nobody but peasants,” said Lucie.
“You’re impossible, Lucie. ... As if peasants didn’t . . . And besides, shouldn’t you mind if Herr Mortimer or the notary could see you ?”
Lucie made no answer, but continued to smile as before.
Gerda took a couple of sluggish strokes and paused again.
“What are you thinking about?” she asked.
Lucie was silent.
“About Gabriel Mortimer,” she said at last.
The boat was carried downstream with the current, and the two girls’ voices became inaudible.
Mortimer lay a long while where he was, crumbling harebells and oxeye daisies between his fingers.
That evening he kissed her.
There were young people at the parsonage. When it grew dark, they went from the garden into the house. Gerda played and sang at the piano.
Lucie sat alone on the balustrade of the veranda, a dusky silhouette against the evening sky.
Mortimer went out to her.
“Have you noticed what a strange light that star has?” he asked.
“Yes,” she answered, looking out toward the horizon. “It’s the evening star.”
A breath of air rustled in the trees.
Mortimer took her hand and caressed it softly.
“Let’s go out into the garden,” he whispered. “I’ve something I should like to say to you.”
She went with him.
At the side of the house was a lilac arbor. He took her into it, drew her close to him, threw his arms about her and kissed her. She tried in vain to free herself.
In the end they sat down together on a bench at the far end of the arbor. Her head lay on his breast, and she hardly moved. But her bosom heaved violently, as if it would burst.
Again and again he kissed her.
“Come to me tomorrow,” he whispered, “in the woods, by the mill sluice.”
Then he kissed her again.
They heard steps in the gravel of the garden path. Lithe as an eel, she twisted herself out of his embrace and slipped into the darkness.
Next day there was a drizzle. Nevertheless Mortimer went to the mill sluice. He sat there all morning under a huge fir tree, smoking cigarettes and listening to the monotonous chirp of a bird.
She didn’t come, and after that she avoided him. Until the present afternoon, when she had wanted to come with him on the river.
his view. He had recognized the voices. Gerda, the parson’s daughter, was rowing; in the stern lay Lucie with her bare arms and hands under her head. She had taken off her bodice.
She lay tranquilly with her eyes closed.
“How can you lie there half-undressed!” exclaimed Gerda, resting on her oars. “Somebody might see you.”
“There’s nobody but peasants,” said Lucie.
“You’re impossible, Lucie. ... As if peasants didn’t . . . And besides, shouldn’t you mind if Herr Mortimer or the notary could see you ?”
Lucie made no answer, but continued to smile as before.
Gerda took a couple of sluggish strokes and paused again.
“What are you thinking about?” she asked.
Lucie was silent.
“About Gabriel Mortimer,” she said at last.
The boat was carried downstream with the current, and the two girls’ voices became inaudible.
Mortimer lay a long while where he was, crumbling harebells and oxeye daisies between his fingers.
That evening he kissed her.
There were young people at the parsonage. When it grew dark, they went from the garden into the house. Gerda played and sang at the piano.
Lucie sat alone on the balustrade of the veranda, a dusky silhouette against the evening sky.
Mortimer went out to her.
“Have you noticed what a strange light that star has?” he asked.
“Yes,” she answered, looking out toward the horizon. “It’s the evening star.”
A breath of air rustled in the trees.
Mortimer took her hand and caressed it softly.
“Let’s go out into the garden,” he whispered. “I’ve something I should like to say to you.”
She went with him.
At the side of the house was a lilac arbor. He took her into it, drew her close to him, threw his arms about her and kissed her. She tried in vain to free herself.
In the end they sat down together on a bench at the far end of the arbor. Her head lay on his breast, and she hardly moved. But her bosom heaved violently, as if it would burst.
Again and again he kissed her.
“Come to me tomorrow,” he whispered, “in the woods, by the mill sluice.”
Then he kissed her again.
They heard steps in the gravel of the garden path. Lithe as an eel, she twisted herself out of his embrace and slipped into the darkness.
Next day there was a drizzle. Nevertheless Mortimer went to the mill sluice. He sat there all morning under a huge fir tree, smoking cigarettes and listening to the monotonous chirp of a bird.
She didn’t come, and after that she avoided him. Until the present afternoon, when she had wanted to come with him on the river.
Mortimer continued lying on his back in the boat and staring up into the fading blue of the sky, where a star or two had already been kindled.
He thought of the happiness which so unexpectedly was about to fall into his hands. One must live while one is young, and he was still young.
He himself would write the conclusion which the meaning of his life demanded and which he had longed for all these years. He had let himself drift long enough with the current like feathery sawdust. Now he would do the steering; it was time.
His old defiance had flamed up anew.
He, Gabriel Mortimer, could not be content with the dull portion of happiness which the carver at the table of life thought fit to serve him along with the others. From now on he would help himself. Who had driven him into marriage ? Chance. He had loved his wife, that was true, but he had also loved other women. Why hadn’t he married one of them ?
He had drifted with the current.
Chance had sat at the rudder. Now chance was to be deposed, now he meant to do his own steering. He had a free will and he would use it.
Did he love Lucie?
Perhaps. At any rate he could not live without possessing her. Lucie should be his bride. Every nerve of his body cried out with hunger for her.
His forehead burned the hand which he stroked obliquely over it from his right temple to his left ear. He forgot time and space. The sun had gone down long ago. The
banks glided past with increasing speed, and he never noticed.
The night mists began to rise. With snake-like writhings they stole across the water, in whose shining black surface the eddies made arabesques and whirlpools. The mists rose and sank but kept always conquering new territory on the slopes of the mountains.
Only once did the faint evening wind make a break in the haze, through which the western sky shone pale and green as a washed corpse.
Mortimer shivered with a touch of ague.
It had become cold. Late it was too, the dusk must have come on a long while ago.
Mortimer looked at his watch. It had stopped.
Where had he drifted ? He didn’t know his whereabouts any more. The banks were strange to him. He must have drifted far down the river.
He seized the oars, turned the boat, and began to row with all his strength. The current was so strong that he felt as if the water was running past the oar blades instead of giving resistance to them. He hardly seemed to move. After a short time he was drenched with sweat and had to rest on his oars, but while he rested he was carried back. The shores fairly danced by.
Mortimer was already overcome with fatigue.
“I’ve drifted down too far,” he thought. “I haven’t the strength to row back.”
The next moment he clearly recognized two white birches on the shore, whose trunks leaned toward each other to form an X.
It was there he had turned the boat half an hour ago!
Realizing the hopelessness of any further exertion, he moored the boat to one of the birches and went ashore.
Where was he ?
It was a district unknown to him.
He succeeded in finding a footpath which led up from the shore, and this he followed. After a while he met a man.
Mortimer spoke to him and asked the way to the doctor’s place.
The man answered nothing, but instead made certain peculiar gestures. The next instant Mortimer recognized him: it was Ola, the deaf-mute.
Mortimer laid a silver piece in his hand and made signs: Down there on the shore is a boat, but you are to row it up to the doctor’s place. And you are to show me how I’m to get to the highway.
The deaf-mute nodded to show he had understood, then he pointed eagerly out into the mist and vanished down toward the shore. After a while the sound of strong, steady oar-beats was audible.
Mortimer stood alone. In which direction should he go ? Involuntarily a couple of lines from Shakespeare came into his head:
I am so lated in the world, that I Have lost my way for ever!
He shook with cold.
He started off at random in the mist. After a while he unexpectedly found himself standing in the middle of the
highway. Farm after farm glimmered past him out of the white dusk, and after a little over an hour he was home.
Mortimer took a short cut through the parson’s garden.
When he had entered the garden, he stopped to look at the moon, which had just risen. Large and greenish-pale, it hung there, like a Japanese lantern on an invisible wire, between two giant lindens.
There was utter stillness in the garden. Breathless stillness.
Mortimer made his way across a grass plot so as not to wake any of the household by the crunching sound of steps on the gravel.
On the water butt at the corner sat a black cat. Its eyes glinted green as two burning emeralds.
All at once it occurred to Mortimer to go around behind the house to see if there was a light in Lucie’s window.
There was no light, so she must be asleep. The whole house was asleep.
Mortimer turned to continue on home, but at the same moment started back, stunned, petrified.
Lucie!
Lucie in her red dress was there. But she was not alone. The other figure was the notary. He was holding her hard against the trunk of a pear tree and kissing her.
Suddenly she gave a little scream and freed herself. She had seen him. The notary swore something in the country dialect. Three pairs of eyes crossed each other confusedly in the darkness.
VI
Mortimer lay in bed but could not sleep.
He hadn’t even lowered the window shades; the moonlight fell straight into the room, spread a stretch of ashen-white carpet over the floor, and painted the cruciform shadow of the window frame on the opposite door.
Mortimer neither thought nor dreamed.
Insignificant episodes from the past were unfolded in his memory with painful distinctness. Places he had visited in his childhood loomed up before his sight in foolishly definite lines. He heard careless voices belonging to people who had died long ago. He lay wondering why on this or that occasion he had said what he did; might he not have just as well said something else?
And when these fantasies left him for a moment in peace, he started up in bed with the question, “Where am I?”
Suddenly he remembered it all.
Then he rose and went to the mirror. He stood there a long time.
“Bless me, don’t I look like an old priest,” he muttered finally.
Then he lay down again but did not sleep.
VII
The train rolled and rattled.
Mortimer had pulled himself into a corner of the compartment, sunk into a sort of lethargy. He could sleep no longer. From the open window a damp breeze swept around his temples. He felt as if his eyelids were too flaccid
to shut tight. Woods, marshes, and heaths rushed past his vision in a blur, as if behind a moistened window.
How long had he been traveling, and to where had he taken his ticket?
He wasn’t quite sure. His memory could no longer preserve such details.
For three days he had not slept. During these days his thoughts had pursued a single goal; how was he to put a stop to this interminable parenthesis that had broken the meaning of his life ? When would the essential part come, for which he had lived ?
What he had recently called his great saving passion was as irrelevant as the rest. Ridiculously irrelevant. It belonged to the parenthesis, it was meaningless nonsense, like everything else in his life.
Had he perhaps been destined to drift through the whole of his life?
He had been taught as a child that the petty cares of life were something base and inconsequential compared with another, higher phase, which was the one thing really important. And this other thing, the most important— how absurd, he had forgotten it!
He had forgotten it. He had a wretched memory, how could one forget such a thing ?
Besides, at bottom perhaps it was nothing. All the other children had clearly realized that it was a joke which no one should pay any attention to; he alone in his innocence had taken it seriously, and now all existence was laughing into his face.
As he looked out of the train window, it seemed as if mountain and hillside were laughing at him. The trees were laughing, the rocks were laughing, and a little red cottage with white window frames was fairly splitting its sides with laughter.
At last he had to laugh himself, he laughed aloud, he roared with laughter.
One of his fellow-passengers, a handsome young man with waxed mustaches, rushed to the window.
“I beg your pardon, but what were you laughing at?” he inquired.
“Oh, just a cottage. . . . Don’t you see that cottage over there ?”
But the cottage was already out of sight. Cheated of his laugh, the young man returned to his seat.
The only other passenger was asleep.
Mortimer sank back into his corner.
The train stopped.
They had come to a little town. There was to be a wait of twenty-five minutes. Mortimer got out and walked into the town at random. Near the station he came upon a confectioner’s shop. He went in and ordered a cup of coffee. The little room had a calming, home-like appearance : knitted antimacassars were spread over all the furniture, and on the wall hung the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Denmark.
It was a quiet evening.
The window was open. The little street lay silent and empty. From a distant alley came the receding sound of footsteps on the stone pavement.
In the upper window of the house opposite, a little wooden house painted yellow with green shutters, the face of a fourteen-year old girl could be glimpsed among fuchsias and balsamines. She had large limpid child’s eyes and reddish-blond hair. She stood in her red bodice and short white linen sleeves, combing her hair.
What did she believe ? What did she think of, what did she dream of ?
Their glances met. The young girl became red as blood, and the shade was lowered.
A newspaper lay on the table. Mortimer took it and glanced up and down its columns. Weddings, betrothals, elections. “During the summer our town has had a number of improvements made. Among other things several houses on Main Street have been painted, which gives the street quite a festive. . . .”
Mortimer immediately conceived a violent wish to see this street. He paid for his coffee and hastened out.
He took a turn to the right without knowing why. The town looked extinct. Not a soul appeared of whom he could ask the way.
At an open window in the lower floor of a dilapidated little house sat an old woman knitting a pair of stockings.
Mortimer stuck his head in through the window and yelled to her—from the expression of her face he inferred that she was hard of hearing—“Will you be so kind as to tell me how I can get to the painted street?”
The old woman gave a start of mortal terror and stared at him without saying a word. She merely stared and stared.
Whither should he turn? He continued in the same direction as before. A drunken man came reeling along the street. A couple of paces from Mortimer he stumbled and fell. Mortimer helped him up, set him on his way, and continued his search for the painted street.
Suddenly a black cat came out of a gateway and rubbed itself caressingly against his leg. Mortimer fell to musing, tortured by an obscure memory that he vainly strove to interpret. He had seen this creature before, quite recently. . . .
A violent ringing from the station interrupted his perplexity. He pulled himself together, as if he had been wakened from a dream, hurried straight to the station, and succeeded in getting into his compartment at the last moment.
The train rolled and rattled.
Mortimer was tired, tired.
The darkness deepened more and more across the moors. Expanses of still water here and there mirrored a desolate heaven fissured with paling gold and blackening gray. In these last days he had formed the peculiar habit of staring off into space without seeing anything.
I am so lated in the world. . . . Am I on the homeward road at last ?
He couldn’t give himself any answer.
He was as good as alone in his compartment. The young man with the waxed mustaches had got out, the other man slept steadily with his face to the wall.
How is this, didn’t I promise myself a little while ago that I would depose chance ?
He smiled scornfully, and his hands clenched convulsively.
There is some evil being, who has amused himself by playing with me as with a ball on a rubber string. At every throw the ball boasts to itself that it has got free, and the next moment it is caught again. But if I should jump off the train now and smash my head on the rocks below, shouldn’t I at last be acting as a free agent ?
Then the evil being could run and look for his ball. The string is broken, the ball is gone!
Mortimer tottered forward to the door of the compartment, fumbled for the handle, got hold of it finally, and opened the door. A cold wind smote him, twitched off his hat, which vanished in the darkness, and fanned his hair with its cooling breath.
Let the train take the others where they want to go or where they don’t want to go, I am tired of drifting with the current.
He took a step into the empty dark but could not find the courage to let go the door handle.
The terror of death froze him and spread a lightning-like sheen over the last thought he still held to, a clear and chilling thought:
Or is the whole thing perhaps that the Evil One has merely tired of the game and has purposely thrown the ball away with such force that the rubber string has broken ? Why of course, it’s clear it must be that way. . . .
“No, I won’t,” he muttered hoarsely, “I won’t”....
How had it happened that he, Gabriel Mortimer, found
himself hanging on to an open door on a train going at full speed ?
“No, I won’t”....
For a few seconds he remained hanging to the door by one arm; then he lost consciousness and let go his hold.
And the train steamed on across the moors with a compartment door hanging open.
Some workmen found him next morning at daylight.
No one could imagine how it had happened.
The eldest of Mortimer’s children is a boy, who bears a striking outward resemblance to him. He will, however, in all human probability, be happier than his father, for he is not very clever.