The Chimney-Sweep’s Wife
This is a sad, cruel story. I heard it told more than once in my childhood, and it made me marvel and shudder.
In a side street stands a fine old tradesman’s house with a smooth grey facade. A big round-arched gateway without any decoration - well, apart from a date and perhaps a couple of garlands of fruit - leads into a narrow cobbled yard with a black stone well like so many others: the sun never finds its way there. In a comer there is an old linden tree with its branches cut back, its bark blackened and its foliage thinned by the years. It is as old as the house, indeed older, and it is still a favourite spot for the children and the cats of the household.
This was once the home of Wetzmann, the chimney-sweep.
Wetzmann the sweep is said to have been a decent fellow. He had got on in life and collected quite a fortune. He was kind to the poor and harsh towards his apprentices, since that was the custom, and no doubt necessary, and he drank warm toddy in the cellar in the evenings - for he had a rough time at home.
His wife was also harsh towards the apprentices, but she was not kind to the poor or to anyone else either. She had been in service as a maid in Wetzmann’s house before she became his second wife. In those days Envy and Lust had been the two deadly sins most dominant in her nature: now their place had been taken by Pride and Anger.
She was a big, powerful woman and was said to have been good-looking in her youth.
The sweep’s son Fredrik was delicate and pale. He was born of Wetzmann’s first marriage and people said he was like his mother. He had a good brain and a gentle nature and was studying to be a priest. He had just enrolled as a student when he was struck down by a long, serious illness which kept him in bed a whole winter.
In one wing of the house lived a charwoman with her daughter Magda. Was her name really Magda? I don’t know, but I always thought of her by that name when as a child I heard the old folk talking about her in the dusk of a winter evening; and I pictured to myself the pale, shy little face of a child, with a mass of fair hair and very red lips. She was fifteen years old and had just been confirmed. Perhaps it was because she had been confirmed that I always assumed she was serious and quiet, like the girls I saw in church on Sundays, and I imagined her always wearing a long, plain, black dress.
In the spring, when the student was convalescing, he would ask the charwoman’s daughter to come and sit at his bedside for a while in the afternoons and read to him.
Fru Wetzmann did not approve of this. She was afraid a certain feeling might develop between them. As far as she cared, her stepson could go and fall in love with anybody he liked and get engaged too, it was no concern of hers; but not with a charwoman’s daughter! She kept a suspicious eye on Magda, but she had to let the arrangement stand. The invalid needed to be occupied somehow, of course, and the doctor had forbidden him to lie reading as he had weak eyes and was not to strain himself.
So Magda sat at his bedside and read aloud from both religious and secular books; and the student lay feeble and pale, listening to her voice and looking at her too, and he began to feel attracted to her.
She had such red lips.
They were almost the same age - he was no more than seventeen or eighteen years old - and they had often played together as children. Before long they were quite affectionate.
Whenever she could, Fru Wetzmann found some pretext for coming into the sick room to see how things were. The two young people should have noticed this and been on their guard; but one doesn’t always do what one should. One day she opened the door silently and cautiously, and this is what she found: Magda had left her chair, which had been placed at some distance from the bed, and she was bending over the pillow with her arms round the young man’s neck. And he was half propped up with one elbow pressed into the pillow, caressing her with his thin white hand, and they were kissing fervently. And now and then they whispered a few broken, meaningless words.
The sweep’s wife went dark red. But she could not help smiling to herself: hadn’t it all turned out exactly as she knew it would? But now she would put a stop to it once and for all. Anger and Pride rose up within her, swelled out and glowed in her cheeks and her eyes, which shone with animation: and who knows - as she stood there silent and unseen watching the two young people who had eyes and ears for nothing but each other - who knows, if perhaps Envy and Lust may not also have crept forth from their secret hiding places and played on their own hidden strings in her soul?
She did not stand there thinking any longer, but strode smartly up to the bed, seized the girl’s delicate little wrist in an iron grip, called her something insulting and slung her out through the door with a torrent of the vilest abuse imaginable. And then she swore in the interested presence of all the servants and apprentices a solemn, full-blooded oath that if that young slut had the nerve to cross her threshold just once more her hide would get such a battering that she would never move a muscle for fourteen days.
And nobody doubted that she meant to keep her word.
The invalid did not reproach his stepmother. Every time she entered the room he turned his face to the wall; he didn’t want to see her or talk to her after the scene with Magda. But one day he had a private word with his father and said that he couldn't live unless he could have Magda for his bride. The old sweep was surprised and annoyed, but he was afraid to raise serious objections straight away: his son was the only person he really liked and who showed him any affection in return, and he could not face the thought of losing him. So he let the matter rest for the time being and confided the problem to his wife.
*
How can I describe what happened after that? It sounds like a bad dream or a story made up to frighten children when they are naughty, and yet it is true.
They say it happened on a Saturday evening in May.
The house is quiet, and so is the street. Possibly somebody is humming a tune at a kitchen window, or some children may be playing down in the alley... The invalid is alone in his room. He is counting the hours and minutes. It is spring outside. Soon it will be summer. Is he never to rise from his bed again, never again to hear the wind in the trees, never measure his day as he used to, with hours of action and hours of rest? And Magda... If only he did not always see her face with that terrified expression that she had when his stepmother seized her by the wrist! She had nothing to be afraid of really. That evil woman wouldn’t seriously dare to do her any harm when she knew he had chosen her for his bride.
He lies there thus dreaming, now awake, now dozing, and lets the pupils of his eyes soak up the beam of sunlight reflected on the white door: and when he closes his eyes he sees a floating archipelago of poison-green islands encompassed by an ink-black sea. And as he dozes the green turns into blue, and the black becomes purple with jagged dark edges, and then it all goes black...
He feels a gentle hand touching his forehead, and he jumps up in the bed.
It is Magda. Magda is standing before him, small and tender and with smiling red lips, and she puts a little bunch of wild flowers on the bed-cover in front of him: anemones, meadow saxifrage and violets.
Is it true, is it really Magda?
‘How did you dare?’ he whispers.
‘Your stepmother is out,’ she replies. T saw her leave just now, dressed to go out. 1 heard she was going to Södermalm, and it’s sure to be some time before she gets back. So I slipped up the stairs and into your room.’
And she stays with him for a long time talking of the woods where she has been walking alone listening to the birds and picking wild flowers for him whom she dearly loves. And they kiss as often as they can and they embrace like two little children and both of them are happy, while the hours pass by and the sunbeam on the white door becomes fiery and red and then pale as it fades away.
‘I think you had better go,’ says Fredrik. ‘She might be back soon. What am I to do if she decides to attack you? I am just lying here weak and ill and I shall be giddy if I get out of bed. You had better go.’
‘I am not afraid,’ says Magda.
For she wants to prove that she really loves him and that she is willing to suffer pain for the sake of her love.
Not until it is getting dark does she kiss him for the last time and creep out of the house. In the yard she stops for a minute and looks up at the window of the room, where he is lying alone on the white bed with her meadow saxifrage and violets on the bedcover. As she turns round to go to her little room in the other wing of the house she finds herself face to face with Fru Wetzmann and she gives a little shriek.
There is nobody in the yard apart from the two of them, nobody at all. There are walls all around, staring down at them in the gathering darkness with their empty black windows, and the old linden tree trembles in its comer.
‘You have been up there,’ says the sweep’s wife.
I always thought as a child that she smiled as she said that, and that her white teeth shone in the dark like the teeth of her husband’s apprentices.
‘Yes, I have been with him,’ Magda may have replied, straight and defiant still in her chalk-white fear.
And then what happened? We don’t know for sure, but there was probably a wild chase round the yard. At the foot of the old linden tree the girl tripped and fell. She did not cry out for help for fear that Fredrik might hear her; and who would have helped her anyway? Her mother was away at work. The furious woman was over her; she had got hold of something to hit with - a broom-handle or something of the sort - and she struck time and time again. A few half stifled cries from a throat paralysed by the fear of death, and then no more.
A couple of the apprentices who had just arrived home stood in the dark by the gateway and looked on, but they made no attempt to help the child. Perhaps they didn’t dare to; and perhaps they were influenced also by a faint hope of seeing the lady of the house taken away one day in a Black Maria.
Fru Wetzmann went indoors after exercising her rights - for she felt instinctively that she had a natural right to impose her authority wherever she could or wanted to - and stumbled upon something soft on the stairs. She called for a maid and a light, for it was totally dark up there. It was Fredrik. He had heard the faint cries, jumped out of bed and rushed out, and he had fallen on the stairs.
*
Magda lived for three days; then she died and was buried.
Wetzmann the sweep paid a sum of money to her mother, the charwoman, and the matter was settled out of court. But it was still a hard blow for the old man. He stopped going to the cellar to drink toddy and mostly sat in a leather chair trying to read an old Bible. He went into a decline, became strange and quiet, and within the year he too was dead and buried.
His son Fredrik slowly got better; but he never finished his theological studies, for both his concentration and his mental powers had been impaired. He was often seen taking flowers to Magda’s grave; he walked very fast, leaning forwards, indeed he almost ran, as if he had a number of urgent errands to attend to, and he usually had some books under his arm, too. Finally he became quite insane.
And the sweep’s wife? She seems to have had a robust constitution. There are people who are not exactly devoid of conscience, but who never by themselves come upon the idea that they might have done something wrong. It may happen that a man in a blue uniform with shiny buttons lays a hand on their shoulder and tells them to come along with him. Then conscience awakes. But no one came to Fru Wetzmann. She put her stepson into an institution when he became too difficult at home, and she mourned for her husband as is proper and customary, and then she married again. And on her wedding day she went to the church wearing a lilac satin jacket with gold braid, ‘dressed up to the nines’ - that is what my grandmother said, who was sitting at her window in the house opposite and saw the whole show as she was turning a page in her book of sermons.