The Sketch in Indian Ink
One April day many years ago, at the time when I still used to wonder about the meaning of life, I went into a little shop in a back street to buy a cigar. I selected a dark, angular El Zelo, stuffed it into my case, paid for it and prepared to go. But suddenly it occurred to me to show the young girl who worked in the shop, and from whom I often used to buy my cigars, a little sketch in Indian ink which I happened to have in my wallet. A young artist had given it to me, and in my opinion it was beautifully done.
‘Look at this,’ I said and passed it to her, ‘what do you think of it?’
She took it in her hand, interested and curious, and she scrutinized it for a long time very closely. She turned it various ways, and her face took on an expression of strenuous mental activity.
‘Well, what does it mean?’, she said at last with an enquiring look.
I was rather taken aback.
‘It doesn't mean anything special,’ I replied. ‘It is just a landscape. This is the ground and that is the sky, and this over here is a road... an ordinary road...’
‘Yes. I can see that,’ she hissed in a rather unfriendly tone: ‘but I wanted to know what it means.’
I stood there embarrassed and quite at a loss. It had never struck me that it ought to mean something. But her assumption was unshakeable. She had got the idea into her head that the picture must be some sort of puzzle. Why should I have shown it to her otherwise? Finally she put it up against the window to make it transparent. Presumably somebody at some time had shown her a special kind of playing card, which in ordinary light shows a nine of diamonds or a jack of spades, but which, if you hold it up to the light, reveals something indecent.
But her experiment produced no result. She gave me back the drawing, and I prepared to leave. Then the poor girl suddenly went very red in the face and burst out with a sob in her throat:
‘Oh. I think it’s really nasty of you to make a fool of me like that! I know very well that I am only a poor girl and couldn’t afford a proper education, but you don’t have to make a fool of me. Can’t you tell me what your picture means?’
What was I to say? I would have given a great deal to be able to tell her what it meant: but I could not, because it had no meaning.
*
Ah, well; that was many years ago. I now smoke different cigars and buy them at a different shop, and I have stopped wondering about the meaning of life. But that is not because I have found it.