Patriarch Papinianus
I was travelling abroad at one time. I saw rivers, hills and mountains which were quite different from ours. I also saw many cities, and among them Paris.
Paris is a lively, attractive place. The men are polite and considerate, apart from the cab-drivers. The women are beautiful and demanding. The Eiffel Tower is three hundred meters high but the screens round the public lavatories are much lower than with us. The buses are like big houses and mostly drawn by three white horses; but one can never travel on them because they are always full of people. One evening I was nearly run over by one of these buses on the boulevard, but at the last moment I scrambled to safety on a traffic island beneath a big electric street lamp. On the same island stood a priest wearing a long black cassock and a low hat with a wide brim: he also had a cotton umbrella under his arm. I could not see his face, as the hat totally over-shadowed it.
‘That was lucky, sir,’ he said in a friendly voice.
‘Yes, monsieur,’ I replied.
Like myself, he was standing waiting for a chance to cross over to the opposite pavement. The buses and cabs drove past in an unbroken file that seemed as if it would never end, and all around us the newsboys cried out so that their poor lungs seemed to crack:
‘La Presse! Via la Pressel’
While I was waiting I dropped the stub of my cigarette and opened my case to light a new one. For I had been standing there smoking a cigarette, and when I considered it was finished I threw it away. But at once a pale-faced little boy, grey with dirt,
came out from between the wheels of the buses, where he seemed at home like the fox in the woodland thickets, picked up the cigarette end, put it into his mouth and lit it. And, a shade happier and more cheerful than before, he continued down the boulevard with the cigarette end in his mouth and his newspapers under his arm, shouting:
‘V’la la Presse! New development in the Dreyfus affair; Scheurer-Kestner has been making love to a negress! Voilà la Pre-e-esse!’
‘Do you not think it strange, sir,’ I asked the cleric, ‘that M. Scheurer-Kestner’s taste for negresses (whether it is true or fabricated) is regarded as evidence for the guilt of Captain Dreyfus and the innocence of Count Esterhazy?’
‘Sir,’ the priest answered without hesitation, ‘superficially it does indeed appear extraordinary. But if one looks at this whole question in its proper perspective one must conclude that it is perfectly justified to see a connection between these things. To have made love to a negress is a very grave sin (though not a mortal sin); it indicates a mentality that is wilfully and deliberately inclined towards evil. It cannot be without significance that God gave the black races such a striking resemblance to devils. To love a negress is almost to seek out hell. And if Captain Dreyfus’s defenders are like this, then imagine what sort of person he himself must be!’
‘But surely, sir, Captain Dreyfus has not been condemned and deported for his or his friends’ bad character in general, but for a quite specific crime; and if he did not commit that crime...’
The cleric gesticulated authoritatively with his umbrella. ‘Ah, sir,’ he interrupted me, ‘the point you arc making is not so substantial as you think. Judges are human and are liable to err. In all probability many people are erroneously found guilty; but it is fortunate that we generally remain in ignorance of such cases, and it is both foolish and criminal to wish to bring them to the attention of the public and to attempt to reverse a verdict which has once been arrived at through the proper processes of the law. It is foolish and criminal to wish, for the sake of one individual, to undermine public confidence in the administration of justice and thereby bring society one step nearer to its dissolution. If Captain Dreyfus were really a patriot he would see that for himself. As things stand at present, he cannot serve his country better than by declaring himself guilty. By insisting upon his innocence he is committing that very act of treason against his country of which in the first place he may have been innocent. But it is starting to rain, sir, and you have no umbrella. Perhaps we are going the same way.’
The priest benevolently put up his umbrella above my head and we proceeded into the crowds on the narrow Rue du Faubourg Montmartre.
‘What you have said seems to imply, sir,’ I began again after collecting my thoughts for a minute, ‘that you regard a man’s fate in this life, the earthly life, as a matter of altogether inferior importance. But if, then, as I suppose, you see things from the point of view of eternity, is not the good or ill of a nation, from that point of view, just as unimportant as that of the individual?’
‘That is impious talk, sir. It is not permitted for a man to regard temporal things from the point of view of eternity. That perspective is reserved exclusively for the Almighty.’
‘But... you do not see the fate of Captain Dreyfus from that point of view, then?’
‘Not at all.’
‘But, sir: when you regard the justice or injustice of his conviction as a matter of inferior importance, do you not all the time have in mind the divine justice which in a future life will make good the wrongs of human justice?’
The priest stopped and looked thoughtfully at his heavy shoes, on which the rain dripped down from his umbrella. His face was now sharply exposed by the gas lighting in a shop window. He had genial and coarse-hewn features. His expression was that of a mathematician or a chess-player pondering over a difficult problem.
‘That is not necessarily the case,’ he finally replied. ‘On that point I am most inclined to follow the opinion which was expressed long ago by the patriarch Papinianus. He considered that it would undermine respect for human justice unduly if one were
to teach that it could be corrected by divine justice. The latter has, according to Papinianus, delegated all its powers to the former. He therefore considered it necessary and good that a man who here on earth has been condemned to death unjustly, but with all the legal proprieties observed, must in the life to come remain condemned.’
When the cleric had said this the pensive expression disappeared from his face. ‘Good night, sir,’ he said in the old genial, friendly voice and he vanished into the steep, narrow street of Notre Dame de Lorette.