The Wages of Sin
This story is about a girl and a pharmacist with a white waistcoat.
She was young and slender, with an air of pine-wood and heather about her. and her skin was bronzed by the sun and slightly freckled. That is what she was like when I knew her. But the pharmacist was a quite ordinary pharmacist. He wore a white waistcoat on Sundays, and this happened on a Sunday. It happened at a place in the country, so far away and remote from all the world that nobody in the district apart from the pharmacist knew that one should wear a white waistcoat on Sundays.
Well, it happened like this. One Sunday morning there was a knock on my door, and when I opened it the pharmacist was standing there in his white waistcoat and he bowed several times. He was most polite and very embarrassed.
T beg your pardon most humbly,’ he said. ‘But Miss Erika came with her sisters yesterday while you were away, and she left her poetry book so that you and I should write something in it. Here it is. But I really have no idea what I should write. I wonder if you might possibly...?’
And he bowed again several times.
T will give some thought to the matter,’ I replied in a friendly tone.
I took the book and I wrote in it, for my own contribution, a translation of ‘Du bist wie eine Blume’ which 1 had made myself and which I always use on these occasions. Then I started to look through my papers to see if I could possibly find some old verses from my schooldays which might be suitable for the pharmacist. At last I came upon this awful poem:
You have driven my wits to confusion
And I long for your smile, so bright:
But you visit me when I am lonely -
For I dreamed of you last night.
In my dream I was walking beside you
On a path in the fading light,
And I saw in the comer of your eye
A tear-drop, glistening bright.
I kissed your cheek and I kissed your eye
And I kissed the tear to flight,
But most of all your warm red lips
1 kissed in my dream last night.
Dreams are not always so happy!
- But I woke before the light,
And I lay there sad and sleepless
Through the long dark hours of night.
For only my eyes have ever caressed
That gentle cheek that I miss,
And the red lips that I dream of Have never been mine to kiss.
I showed this poem to the pharmacist and suggested that he could use it if he wanted to. He read it attentively, twice over, and he began to glow with delight.
‘Did you really write this yourself?’ he asked in the innocence of his heart.
‘I am afraid so,’ I replied.
He thanked me most warmly for my permission to use the poem, and when he left the room I think we both felt that we should soon be on Christian name terms.
*
That evening the girl’s parents gave a little party. There were plenty of young people there. We drank cherry juice on a verandah surrounded by greenery.
I sat looking at the girl.
No, she was not herself. Her eyes were bigger and more rest
less than usual and her lips were redder. And she could not sit still in her chair.
At times she glanced at me furtively but more often she glanced at the pharmacist. And the pharmacist that evening was as jubilant as a cockerel.
And by the time the punch was served we were on Christian name terms.
*
We young folk went down to the meadow to play games. We threw hoops and played other games, and while we played the sun went down behind the hills and it grew dark.
We had piled up our hoops and staves on the ground and we were now standing in groups whispering and laughing as dusk descended. But the girl came up to me out of the shadows, took me by the arm and led me away behind a barn.
‘You must answer me a question,’ she said. ‘Did the pharmacist really write that poem himself?’
Her voice was quivering, and she tried to look away as she spoke.
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘He wrote it last night. I heard him pacing up and down his room all night long.’
But I felt a sting in my heart the moment I had said this: for I could see that she was a sweet and lovable girl and it was a great sin to deceive her like this.
‘Who knows?’ I said to myself. ‘Who knows? Perhaps it is that sin of which the scripture says that it cannot be forgiven.’
*
The twilight grew darker and it was night, and a star looked down between the trees in the young wood where we were walking two by two.
But I walked alone.
I no longer recall which paths I trod that evening. I left the others and went deeper into the woods.
Deep in the woods I saw among the firs the shining white trunk of a birch tree. And by that tree stood two young people, and they were kissing: and I saw that one of them was the girl with an air of pine-wood and heather about her. But the other was the pharmacist, and he was a quite ordinary pharmacist with a white waistcoat. And he was pressing her tight against the white trunk of the birch tree and kissing her.
And when he had kissed her three times, I went away and wept bitterly.