Vox POPULI
Stockholm is the most moral city in the world. When it chances from time to time that a poet or an artist, in the grip of his inspiration, oversteps the limits of decency and thereby misuses the gifts which Providence gave him, then not only the people but even the little dogs are filled with moral indignation.
I observed that once again yesterday.
As the clock struck three I came out of the Library, worn out by the toil of my researches within its cool walls and heavily laden with books fatter than I shall ever be and so learned that you would not even understand the titles if I told you what they were.
It was a warm, idyllic summer day. I stepped out into the park and turned to walk along a side path under the big green trees. And I came by chance to the little hill where ‘Grandfather’ sits dreaming motionless and silent while the boy sleeps on his knee.
I collapsed on to the bench in front of the bronze group quite exhausted, threw the books to left and right of me, lit a cigarette and half closed my eyes. I have noticed that you get a more synthetic view of the world when you look at it with half-closed eyes; all the lines become sharper and simpler, all the irrelevant, confusing little nuances merge, the figures glide back and forth across the stage like silhouettes, some nearer, some further away. And 1 was fortunate indeed to be sitting with half-closed eyes just at that moment, when two frightfully ugly old ladies went by with a little black dog on a lead.
The situation, then, is this: in the background sits Grandfather dreaming his old dream about the generations to come, of which he - no doubt mistakenly, I fear - is thinking something very beautiful; I am sitting in the auditorium; and at the front of the stage, between us, two frightfully ugly old ladies glide on stage, from right to left, with a little black dog on a lead.
As is well known, Grandfather is a highly indecent piece of sculpture - I have to remind you of that in case anyone may have forgotten; for that is part of the story.
The two old ladies stop in front of the bronze group and exchange their thoughts about the work of art; I cannot hear what they are saying, but I see from the shaking of the heads and from the violent waving of the dark green parasols in the air that they are regarding the matter from the point of view of morality rather than aesthetics, and that their verdict is unfavourable.
Meanwhile the little dog runs here and there, as far as his lead will let him, until at last he realizes that something has claimed his mistresses' attention and should therefore claim his, and that this something is that bronze group there on the grass. Thereupon he sits down like a good dog, pricks up his ears and sniffs the air, and listens to the two frightfully ugly old ladies; and like myself he soon concludes from the shaking of the heads and the wild gesticulations of the dark green parasols, that the bronze group as a whole is the object of their intense disapproval. It is therefore natural and proper that he is immediately seized by an inexorable hatred of that group: otherwise he would not be a good dog.
‘Woof!’ he says, rushing up to the bronze group with such malevolence that the two old ladies take fright and instantly fall silent. ‘Woof, woof, woof!’
Now the pantomime starts to get lively: on the one side the little dog, frothing at the mouth and his eyes sparkling with loyal anger, advances step by step against his new mortal enemy as he barks: - ‘Woof, woof, woof!’ - on the other side the two pale-faced, thin, black-dressed and frightfully ugly old ladies both pull together at the lead and only inch by inch manage to drag themselves and the dog away, until at last they all disappear out into the wings on the left. ‘Woof!’ says the little dog once more before he disappears, and with that he is out of the story: but that doesn’t mean that the story has come to an end.
We all know that when a little dog barks all the other dogs of
the neighbourhood promptly join in. And Humlegård Park is full of cheerful young dogs that roll about on the lawns and pass their days in innocent play and, when occasion arises, rush up and say ‘wow, wow!’ if they are big or ‘woof, woof!’ if they are small; and the smallest of all say ‘yap, yap, yap!’
‘We can hear barking,’ said all these dogs to each other, ‘we must join in.’And they came running up from all directions, from the library fountain, from Linne’s statue and all the way from Scheele’s hill, and they all stopped in front of Grandfather barking:
‘Wow, wow, woof, woof1. Yap, yap, yap!’
They are barking still.