Drizzle
It is autumn again and the days are dark, and the sun is hiding in the gloomiest comer of space for fear that someone might notice how pale and old and worn out she has become lately. But while the wind whistles about the windows and the rain gushes down the drainpipes and a wet dog down in the street howls outside a closed gate, and before the first fire of autumn has burnt down in the grate, I will tell you a story about the drizzle.
Listen.
Once upon a time the good Lord was so filled with wrath over the wickedness of men that he determined to punish them by making them still more wicked. Most of all he would have liked, in his great goodness, to drown the whole lot of them in a new Flood: he still remembered how he had enjoyed the spectacle when all living things had been consumed by the last one. But unfortunately he had once in a weak moment promised Noah that he would never do that again.
And so he said one day to the Devil: ‘Listen, my friend. You are not exactly a saint, of course, but you do have some good ideas at times and one can discuss things with you. My human beings are wicked and will not mend their ways. My infinite patience has now come to an end, and I have determined to punish them by making them still more wicked. Indeed, I should like to see them all destroy themselves and each other. It seems to me that, although our interests are generally so very different, we might on this occasion be able to find some common ground. What advice can you give me?’
The Devil reflected, biting the end of his tail. ‘Lord,’ he said at last, ‘your wisdom is as great as your goodness. Statistics prove that the greatest number of crimes is committed in autumn, when the days are dark and the skies are grey and the earth is wrapped in rain and fog.’
The good Lord pondered long over these words.
T understand,’ he said finally. ‘Your advice is good, and I will follow it. You have some good talents, my friend, but you should use them better.’
The Devil smiled and gave a swish of his tail, for he was flattered and moved; and then he limped home.
The good Lord, however, said to himself:
‘Let there be drizzle for ever more. Let the clouds never disperse, and the fog never lift, the sun never shine again. Let it be misty and grey unto the end of days!’
And it was so.
The umbrella makers and Wellington boot manufacturers were pleased at first, but it was not long before the smile turned sour even around their lips. People do not appreciate the importance of good weather until they have had to do without it for a while. Cheerful people became gloomy. Gloomy people became insane and hanged themselves in long rows or collected together to hold prayer meetings. Before long, people stopped working, and there was great distress. The crime rate increased enormously, the prisons were overcrowded and the lunatic asylums only had room for the sane. The population declined, and as people died their homes were deserted. The death penalty was imposed for suicide. But nothing helped.
The human race, whose poets and dreamers had for generations imagined an eternal spring, now faced in its last days an everlasting autumn.
Day by day the desolation increased. Lands were wasted, towns became ruins. The dogs collected in the market places and howled. But in the streets an old man limped from house to house with a bag on his back collecting souls. And every evening he limped back home with his sack full.
One evening, however, he did not limp home. Instead, he went to the gates of heaven and straight on up to the good Lord’s throne. There, he stopped and bowed, saying:
‘Lord, you have aged of late. We have both aged, and that is because we are having such a miserable time. Lord, it was bad advice I gave you. The sins that interest me require a little sunshine now and then if they are to prosper. You have made a rag-and-bone man of me!’
And with these words he threw his dirty bag down on the steps before God’s throne so violently that it burst open and the souls fluttered out. And they were not black, but grey.
‘These are the souls of the last men,’ said the Devil. T am giving them to you. Lord. But take care not to use them if you mean to create a new world.’
*
The wind whistles about the windows and the rain gushes down the drainpipes and that is the end of the story. If you have not understood it then take heart at the thought that the weather will be fine tomorrow.