Killing
It is written: Thou shalt not kill.
We all know, of course, that it is sometimes necessary to kill.
But perhaps there is something in the old commandment nonetheless. In spite of the layer of dust which the unending battle of life has in the course of years deposited upon my conscience, it still happens at times that I shudder when I think of some of the murders I have committed. I do not remember them all. And some of them were necessary, and over these I feel no regret.
But among those I have killed from spite or a sudden whim I remember above all a little bird, a spider and a fox.
*
Most children are spiteful. When I was a child I went about for a time with a boy who was even more spiteful than I was. He taught me to shoot with a catapult. When the summer holidays came we went into the woods every day with our catapults; and we could not see a little bird sitting and twittering on a bough without at once putting a stone into the catapult and shooting. But we hardly ever hit the target. Birds, like all other animals, have learnt to be on their guard against human beings and we hardly had time to take aim before the bird disappeared like a speck into the blue. This constant bad luck made us so monstrously spiteful that we finally regarded it as a point of honour for us to kill a little bird, however it might be done. Then it chanced one day - not in the woods, but in the comer of the garden which belonged to the country house where we lived - that we saw in a bush a little
chick of a bird that had not yet learnt to fly, but just hopped from branch to branch. Without thinking for a moment, we crept up as close as possible and let fly with our catapults. The little bird fell to the ground, but it was not properly dead. It lay there in the grass with its beak wide open and in the beak its little tongue was moving. The eyes were alive, too. We stood dumbfounded, blood-red with shame, and looked at each other. What were we to do? Should we kill it? And then what should we do with a little dead bird?
‘He’ll soon die by himself,’ said my friend.
‘Yes,’ 1 said, ‘he can’t live for long.’
We felt that neither of us dared to touch him again.
The sun had not gone behind a cloud, and the birds were still singing in the trees. But we crept away without looking at each other and we never played again in that comer of the garden.
*
Why did I kill the spider? It was not out of spite; it was purely impulsive: I killed it because it frightened me.
It was in Hamburg. I was sitting alone in a hotel room reading a book. The electric light fell white and cold over the white pages of my book. I had lit all the lamps in the room. It was quiet around me, no sound except the clock ticking on the ledge of the tiled stove and the rustle of paper as I turned the pages. It was a foggy autumn evening; all the unwholesome vapours of the town entered into my room and poisoned my state of mind. Now and then I looked up from the book and out through the window: the dead, empty Alster lake in the fog, the gas flares on the Lombard Bridge...
Suddenly I felt something touching my hand. It was an enormous spider, hairy and fat, creeping across my hand down into the book I was reading. When he saw me looking at him he started to run. I jumped up from the chair and flung the book away from me, white with dread. But the spider had already managed to run down one of my legs on to the floor; like a ball of thread he rolled across the middle of the room as fast as if his back legs had been on fire. I had to kill him, it seemed like plain self-defence. I picked up the book from the floor, threw it at the spider and crushed him.
Isn’t there an old superstition that you should never kill a spider?
I didn’t dare touch the book. I have never looked at it since.
I had to see a human face... I went to the doorway and rang for the waiter. When he came I stared at him nonplussed until I managed to improvise: ‘Bring me a little whisky.’
*
I killed the fox because I had a gun in my hand when I met him.
It seemed obvious to me that I ought to kill a fox if I met him in the woods with a gun in my hand.
It was in the winter. It snowed every day and every day I went walking in the woods with a worthless old gun and a black dog called Gustav. I did not hunt. Sometimes I shot at fir cones to amuse myself and to please Gustav, who at every shot jumped up and barked loudly with delight over the noise. It didn’t frighten him, for he had not yet learnt that a gun is an implement for murder.
One day as it was getting dark I met a little fox. He had been down town on business and was now on his way home with a speckled hen between his teeth. I stood hidden behind a juniper bush and he ran close past me without seeing me. I loaded and fired. Why? That is what one does.
The fox continued a few steps forward as if nothing had happened. Then he stopped with a jolt as if suddenly surprised and dropped the hen. And with a weak, anxious cry he stretched himself out in the snow and died. Gustav, the black dog, who was still almost a puppy, bounded up with wild delight, barking as merrily as could be, and gave him a playful nip in the ear. But the next moment he understood that the strange animal was dead. There came an indescribably shy, bewildered look into his bright black eyes. At last he crept close up to me with his tail drooping and howled softly.
I left the fox lying there and went home, for I was cold.
The next day I went along the same path, for it was my favourite walk. I was whistling to myself as I walked along and gave no thought to what had happened the day before. All of a sudden I stopped in my tracks: on the ground before me lay a dead fox. The crows has been picking at the upturned eye and it was covered with blood.
I stood for a moment and looked at the fox as I listened to the sound of two branches being rubbed together by the wind.
‘A living fox is a prettier sight than a dead one,’ I said to myself.
And after that I found different paths to walk on.