The Fur Coat
It was a cold winter that year. People shrank in the cold and became smaller, apart from those who had fur coats.
District Judge John Richardt had a big fur coat. This was virtually a necessity in view of his position, for he was managing director of a brand new company. His old friend Dr Henck, on the other hand, did not have a fur coat: instead, he had a beautiful wife and three children. Dr Henck was thin and pale. Some people grow fat as a result of marriage, others grow thin. Dr Henck had grown thin; and Christmas Eve came along.
‘This has been a bad year for me,’ said Dr Henck to himself as, in the Christmas Eve dusk at three o’clock in the afternoon, he went on his way to his old friend John Richardt to borrow money. T have had a very bad year. My health is shaky, if not ruined. My patients on the other hand have perked up, practically the whole lot of them; I hardly ever see them these days. I suppose I shall die soon. My wife thinks so too: I’ve seen that by looking at her. If that is the case it would be best if it happened before the end of January, when that damned life insurance premium has to be paid.’
When he had reached this point in his train of thought he was at the corner of Regeringsgatan and Hamngatan. And as he was crossing the road to continue down Regeringsgatan he slipped on a smooth sledge-track and fell over, and at that moment a sleighcab came along at full speed. The driver swore and the horse instinctively swerved to the side, but Dr Henck nevertheless received a blow on the shoulder from one runner and a screw or bolt or something of the kind caught in his overcoat and ripped a big hole in it. People collected around him. A police constable
helped him to his feet, a girl brushed the snow off him, an old lady gesticulated over his torn coat in a way that showed she would have liked to mend it on the spot if she could, a prince of the royal house who happened to be passing picked up his hat and placed it upon his head, and everything was in order again, apart from the coat.
‘God, what a sight you are, Gustav! ’ said Judge Richardt when Henck came up to his office.
‘Yes, I have been run over,’ said Henck.
‘Just like you,’ said Richardt, laughing good-humouredly. ‘But you can’t go home looking like that. You can borrow my fur coat and I will send a boy home to fetch me my overcoat.’
‘Thank you,’ said Dr Henck.
And after borrowing the hundred crowns he needed, he added: ‘We’ll see you at dinner, then.’
Richardt was a bachelor and he regularly spent Christmas Eve with the Hencks.
*
On his way home Henck was in a better humour than he had been in for a long time.
‘It is because of the fur coat,’ he said to himself. ‘If I had been sensible I would have got myself a fur coat on credit long ago. It would have given me more self-confidence and made people look up to me. People can’t pay such tiny fees to a doctor in a fur coat as they can to a doctor in an ordinary overcoat with tom buttonholes. It’s a pity I didn’t think of that before. Now it’s too late.’
He went a little way through Kungsträdgården. It was dark already, it had started snowing again, and people he knew did not recognize him.
‘Anyway, who knows if it is too late?’ Henck pursued his thoughts further. T am not old yet, and I may have been mistaken about my health. I am as poor as a little church mouse; but so was John Richardt not long ago. My wife has been cold and unfriendly towards me lately. Surely she would start to love me again if I could earn more money and if I wore a fur coat. It seemed to me that she liked John more after he had acquired his fur coat than she did before. She was rather taken with him as a girl too, of course; but he never courted her. Instead, he told her and everybody else that he would never dare to marry on less than ten thousand a year. But I dared; and Ellen was a poor girl and wanted to get married. I don’t believe she was so in love with me that I could have seduced her if I had wanted to. But I didn’t want to anyway; how could I have dreamed of that kind of love? I haven’t thought like that since I was sixteen and saw Faust at the opera for the first time, with Arnoldson. But I am sure anyway that she was fond of me when we were first married; one can’t be wrong about that sort of thing. Why couldn’t she be fond of me again?
‘When we were first married she used to say nasty things to John every time they met. But then he founded a company and invited us to the theatre at times and bought a fur coat. And in time my wife naturally grew tired of saying nasty things to him.’
*
Henck had a few more errands to see to before dinner. It was half past five by the time he arrived home laden with packages. His left shoulder felt very tender; otherwise there was nothing to remind him of his mishap in the afternoon apart from the fur coat.
‘It will be interesting to see my wife’s face when she sees me dressed in furs,’ Dr Henck thought to himself.
The hall was quite dark. The lamp was never lit except during consulting hours. T can hear her in the drawing room now,’ thought Dr Henck. ‘She is as light on her feet as a little bird. It’s funny, but I still get a warm feeling around my heart every time I hear her steps in the next room.’
Dr Henck was proved right in supposing that his wife would
give him a more affectionate reception when he was wearing a fur coat than she otherwise did. She crept up close to him in the darkest corner of the hall, wrapped her arms gently round his neck and kissed him warmly and passionately. Then she burrowed her head into the collar of his fur coat and whispered:
‘Gustav hasn’t come home yet.’
‘Oh yes,’ Dr Henck replied in a lightly trembling voice as he caressed her hair with both hands, ‘yes, he has come home.’
*
There was a blazing fire in Dr Henck’s study. Whisky and water stood on the table.
Judge Richardt was sprawled out in a big leather-clad easy chair smoking a cigar. Dr Henck sat hunched up in a comer of the sofa. The open door led in to the dining room, where Fru Henck and the children were busy lighting up the Christmas tree.
Dinner had been very quiet. Only the children had been chattering and all talking at once and enjoying themselves.
‘You’re not saying anything, old fellow,’ said Richardt. ‘Are you sitting there thinking about your tom overcoat?’
‘No,’ said Henck. ‘I’m thinking rather about the fur coat.’
There was silence for some minutes before he went on:
T am also thinking about something else. I am sitting here thinking that this is the last Christmas we shall celebrate together. I am a doctor and I know that I have not many days left. I am absolutely certain of it now. And therefore I want to thank you for all the kindness you have shown lately to me and to my wife.’
‘Oh, you are mistaken,’ muttered Richardt, looking away.
‘No,’ answered Henck, T am not mistaken. And I want to thank you also for lending me your fur coat. It gave me the last seconds of happiness that I have known in my life.’