The Dream of Eternity
When I was still very young 1 believed with complete certainty that I had an immortal soul. I considered it a holy and precious gift and I was glad and proud of it.
I used to say to myself: ‘This life I am living is a dark, confused dream. One day I shall wake up into another dream which is closer to reality and has a deeper meaning than this one. And out of that dream 1 shall in turn wake up into a third and then a fourth, and each new dream will be closer to the truth than the one before. And coming closer to the truth in this way constitutes the meaning of life, which is deep and full of significance.’
And in the joy of knowing that I possessed in my immortal soul a capital which I could not lose by gambling or by getting into debt, I proceeded to lead a dissolute life and squandered like a prince what I owned and what was not my own.
But one evening I was with some of my cronies in a big hall gleaming with gold and electric lamps and with a smell of rot and decay coming up through the floorboards. Two young girls with painted faces and an old woman whose wrinkles had been plastered over were dancing on a stage, accompanied by a wailing band, the raucous applause of men and the noise of breaking glasses. We watched these women, drank heavily and talked about the soul’s immortality.
‘It is ridiculous to believe,’ said one of my friends who was older than me, ‘that it would be a blessing to have an immortal soul. Look at that old woman dancing over there, whose head and hands shake whenever she stops for a moment. It is obvious that she is nasty and ugly and thoroughly disgusting and gets more and more so every day. Wouldn’t it be preposterous to imagine her having an immortal soul! But it is just the same with you and me and all of us. What a sick joke it would be to give us immortality!’
‘What I dislike most about what you have said,’ I replied, ‘is not that you deny the soul’s immortality, but that you take pleasure in denying it. Human beings are like children playing in a garden surrounded by a high wall. From time to time a gate is opened in the wall and one of the children disappears through that gate. The others are then told that he has been led away to another garden which is bigger and lovelier than this one. They listen for a while in silence and then they go on playing among the flowers. Imagine now that one of the boys is more inquisitive than the others and climbs up the wall to see where his friends have gone. And when he comes down again he tells the others what he has seen: outside the gate sits a giant who eats up the children that are led out. And every one of them must be led out through that gate when his time comes. You are that boy, Martin: and I find it quite ludicrous that you report what you think you have seen, not full of despair, but pleased with yourself and glad that you know more than the others.’
‘The youngest of those girls is very beautiful,’ answered Martin.
‘It is terrible to be annihilated, and it is also terrible to be unable to be annihilated,’ said another of my friends.
Martin pursued his thoughts further.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘one ought to be able to find a middle way. Gird up thy loins and set forth to discover the mean proportional between time and eternity. Whoever finds that can establish a new religion, for he will have at his command the finest bait that a fisher of men ever possessed.’ \
The band played noisily to an end. The gilding of the hall gleamed darker through the tobacco smoke, and up through the floorboards there still came a smell of rotting and decay.
We parted and went our separate ways. I wandered through the streets for a long time: I came upon streets I did not recognize and have never seen since, strangely desolate and empty streets, and their rows of houses seemed to open up to let me through, whichever way I turned, and then to close their ranks again behind my back. I did not know where I was until I found myself standing in front of my own door. It was wide open. I went in through the door and up the stairs. At one of the staircase windows I stopped and looked at the moon: I had not noticed before that there was moonlight that evening.
But I have never before nor since seen such a moon. One could not really say it was shining. It was ash-grey and pale and unnaturally big. I stood for a long time staring at that moon, though I was dreadfully tired and longing to go to sleep.
I lived on the third floor. When I had climbed up two flights of stairs I thanked God there was only one left to go. But when I had reached the top of the third flight it struck me that the landing was not dark, as it always was otherwise, but faintly lit just like the others, where the moon shone in through the staircase windows. But there were only three flights of stairs in the house, apart from the attic stairs; for that reason the top landing was always dark.
‘The attic door must be open,’ I said to myself. ‘The light is coming from the attic stairway. It is careless of the cleaners to leave the attic door open: thieves can get up into the attic.’
But there was no attic door. There was only an ordinary staircase, just like the ones below.
So I had miscounted: I still had one flight of stairs to go.
But when I had climbed up these stairs and stood on the landing, I found it hard to stop myself from crying out aloud. For this landing was not dark either, and here, too, there was no attic door standing open but another staircase leading upwards just as before. And through the staircase window the moon shone in, and it was ash-grey and dull and unnaturally big.
I rushed up the stairs. I could not think any more. I staggered up another flight, and another; I was no longer counting them.
I wanted to scream, I wanted to wake up this bedevilled house and see people around me: but my throat was tight with panic. Suddenly I thought of trying to read the names on the door plates. What sort of people could it be that lived in this tower of Babel?
The moonlight was too weak; I struck a match and held it up close to a brass plate.
I read on it the name of one of my friends, who was dead.
Then the bonds of my tongue were loosed and I screamed.
‘Help! Help! Help!’
*
That scream was my salvation, for it woke me up from the terrible dream of eternity.