Archimedes’ Point
At one time I knew a horrible little street-urchin.
He was the same age as I was and lived in the same street. But he was superior to me in everything, not only in experience and daring, but also in knowledge; for with the help of a piece of chalk or coal he could cover the walls and fences of the little street with words and symbols I did not understand. When I wanted to go out, if I was alone and unprotected, I always stuck my nose out through the gate first and looked down the street to make sure that the little urchin was nowhere near. For he was stronger than I was and he resented the fact that my clothes were better and cleaner than his own.
One day I was given a sledge by my father. It was covered with a piece of flowery felt, the runners had sharp steel blades which reflected the sunlight and it had a little bell at the front. When 1 went down to the gateway with this sledge for the first time and the scent of newly-fallen snow in my nose made me sneeze, I was at once overcome by such mad delight that I totally forgot my usual precautions and went rushing out through the gate without looking either to right or left of me, jumping about and dancing like a puppet and shouting wild war-cries.
Just outside my gate the road began to slope downhill. I quickly sat astride my sledge and let it slide downwards; but the slope was not very steep and so my progress was slow and I had to help from time to time with my feet. An icy wind came up the street which started to make my ears cold, and it even began to chill my joy. As the icy cold was creeping in under my clothes, so the thought crept into my soul that I was no longer as happy as I had been a moment before when I had been coming down to
the gateway with my sledge.
And while I was thinking that thought I suddenly saw the little street-urchin standing in his gateway with his hands in his trouser pockets. He was filthy, his hair was scurfy, and he looked frightful, and when I saw him my heart was filled with fear and anxiety, for he really was a dreadful ruffian.
I had no chance of getting away. I sat quite still on my sledge not moving a muscle, like a rabbit fascinated by a boa constrictor, and just waited for the boy to come out of his gateway and beat me up.
But my guardian angel was vigilant. The little street-urchin did not come out from his gateway; he just stood there with his hands in his pockets, contemplating me with indifference rather than hostility, and said:
‘Clout yourself on the backside, kid, and you’ll go faster!’
Then he took a lump of coal from his pocket, wrote a four-letter word on the wall and went in through his gate.
I went on riding down the hill and thrashed about with my feet to get forward, for the slope was not very steep. And then it suddenly struck me that there might be something in what the little street-urchin had said. When I am sitting on my sledge and somebody gives me a push in the back the sledge goes forward a bit. So if I now thump myself in the back it must naturally have the same effect as if somebody else did it. It was perfectly simple; what a fool I had been not to think of it before! I carefully looked around to make sure the little street-urchin was nowhere about, for I didn’t want him to see that I was following his advice. And then I started to thump myself in the back as hard as I could.
But the sledge didn’t budge. I thumped myself in the back till I was hot and red in the face, and two ladies stopped and laughed at me, but the sledge did not move.
Then I got cross and upset and took my sledge by the cord and ran home with it, wishing 1 had an elder brother who could beat the little street-urchin out of my way.
At the dinner table I told my father of my adventure and asked him to explain to me why it is that one cannot go forward on a sledge by thumping oneself in the back. My father did not laugh
at me and he didn’t tell me I was stupid as most fathers would have done, but he tried to give me a reasoned explanation of the phenomenon; but in so doing he got himself tangled up in contradictions so that I finally decided that he did not understand much more about it than I did. I then gave up hope of ever finding the solution to this problem and I asked my father if he would not at least beat up the little street-urchin. But he said he didn’t have the time.
*
Time flies, the years pass.
The little street-urchin grew up and became a great lout. Myself, I went to school and learned all sorts of things; but I never found a quite satisfactory explanation of how it is that one cannot drive oneself forward on a sledge by thumping oneself in the back. It still happens at times that I lie awake at night pondering over this problem. And if one day I have a son and he asks me about this point I have firmly made up my mind to laugh at him and tell him he is stupid.