A CUP OF TEA
IT IS said that in England one may imperil one’s social position by drinking brandy or similar drinks in public. Well, every country has its own customs. Last night I had a rather unpleasant experience through the circumstance of wanting to drink a cup of tea at the Café—it doesn’t matter what café it was.
The truth of the matter is that just now I am finishing a novel in two parts, in which I am exposing the humbug in all modern communal life. It is all finished but the last chapter, and I had intended to write that yesterday. Accordingly I got up at eight in the morning, set myself down, burning with creative energy, at my writing desk in my shirt sleeves and began: “The October twilight was spreading ever deeper over the city, while the autumn rain... I had got no further when my telephone rang. It was one of my friends, who wanted to borrow some money—a mere trifle of a hundred crowns, but he needed it right away. Naturally I couldn’t say no, and as I had at the moment no one to send with it, I had to go myself. So I went, and on the way home, just outside my door, I met another of my friends, who was busy going around in a cab to start a company and who asked me if I cared to undertake the position of treasurer. I didn’t want to refuse point blank, that would have seemed unfriendly, so I began by taking breakfast with him and later we had our discussion.
It was two o’clock;, and we had almost come to a definite conclusion, when my maid, who in some unaccountable way had divined my whereabouts, came rushing in to say that my mother-in-law was at the point of death. My mother-in-law lives in Kungsholm; so I took a cab and drove there. Quite right, my mother-in-law did lie at the point of death, but she didn’t die till six o’clock. Well, now at last I could go home and finish my novel. . . . But, lo and behold! I stopped at Jacob Square as usual in front of Silvander’s to look at a new kind of glove, and as I turned to go on home, I stood face to face with a third friend, a man who was tired of organizing a company and preferred to play chess. He asked me therefore if I would drink some whisky and play chess. “Thanks a lot,” I answered without reflecting, for I had entirely forgotten my novel, and when the next moment I remembered it, I had already accepted and could not change my mind—that would have shown lack of character. So we went to his house, drank whisky and played chess till eleven. Then I said good night and started home with the resolute intention of finishing my novel—and now the story begins.
Kindly attend!
It was about a ten minutes’ walk home. When I had gone half the distance, I noticed that I was tired and a bit sleepy. I therefore reflected involuntarily that writing would not go well if I went home and sat down at the desk as I was.
“Over here to the right is a cozy café-restaurant,” I said to myself. “If I go in and drink a big cup of strong tea and
then go home and write, my final chapter will be first class.”
Accordingly I went in.
In the café there were as usual Swedes drinking punch.
There was only one small table free and it was in the middle of the hall. There I settled myself.
“May I have a cup of tea ?” I said to one of the waitresses.
There was a complete silence in the hall. All around sat Swedes with heavy stomachs and rosy cheeks, drinking punch; and at regular intervals they clinked glasses and said, “Bottoms up!”
But when I asked for a cup of tea, there was a complete silence in the room.
“A cup of tea?” inquired the waitress with a dubious inflection.
“Yes,” I answered, “a cup of tea.”
“Do you want only tea ? No bread and butter ? Or brandy or ale? Or punch?”
“No, thank you,” I said affably. “I only want a cup of tea.”
“Certainly,” answered the waitress.
People stared at me from all directions. For an entire minute there was no one who said, “Bottoms up!
People were talking all around me, and I heard a good deal of what they said.
“It’s a crazy foreigner,” said one.
“Good Lord! how much hypocritical nonsense there is nowadays,” said another.
“He’s full and wants to get sober,” said a third.
“How can a man want to be sober when he’s full ?” asked a fourth.
The waitress came with my tea. I paid immediately and gave her a tip of a crown so that she shouldn’t think I drank tea because I couldn’t afford to drink punch.
But I never got a chance to drink that tea. I sat very quietly and peaceably stirring it and trying by my behavior to assure my neighbors that I wished them no harm—when an old college mate from Upsala, whom I had not seen for fifteen years, suddenly stood in front of me and stared with steely eyes at me and my teacup.
“Is it really you?” he said excitedly. “And you mean to drink that bellywash?”
“Yes,” I said diffidently.
“So, you’ve come to this. This is a fine state of things!”
I thought he was joking and tried to answer in the same vein.
“I suppose you’re trying to be funny,” answered my old comrade.
Without further ado he proceeded to inform me that from the first hour of our acquaintance he had never been able to endure me. He had perceived at once that I was a humbug, or, if I wished him to express himself more clearly, a cur. He had always longed for a suitable occasion to tell me so, and now he had said it.
My former comrade had been raising his voice higher and higher; at the conclusion he yelled so as to be heard through the entire hall. Everyone listened to him enchanted, and the headwaiter came out into the doorway. He was a big blowsy fellow.
“What’s all this?” he asked in a threatening tone, as he surveyed the assemblage.
They all pointed to me and said in chorus, “It’s that man sitting over there, who is behaving so disgracefully.”
The next moment I found myself on the street, and as to my novel I mean to finish it today.