The Clown
Yesterday a familiar face flashed past me in the street. It was pale and had a weary expression, but the features were sharp and distinctive.
I did not know his name. I was sure I had seen him before, perhaps a long time ago, but I couldn't remember when or in what circumstances. His face had aroused my interest, but I couldn’t explain why, and I dug through all sorts of old recollections in the junk-room of my memory to try to identify him, but all in vain.
That evening I was at the theatre. There I found him again to my surprise on the stage, playing a supporting role. He was only slightly made up, I recognized him at once and looked for his name on the programme. I found it, but it was not known to me. I followed his acting with intense interest. He was playing the part of a pitiful, foolish servant, whom everybody made fun of. The part was as feeble as the play, and he played it in a studied and conventional way; but in certain places his voice took on a sharp, bitter tone which didn't belong to the part.
That bitter tone still echoed in my ears late at night, when I was walking up and down in my room. And with its help I finally managed to dig out the memory that was attached to it. I found that we had been at school together; but he was many years younger than myself. When I was in the top form, he was in one of the bottom ones.
When I was in the top class at school I stood at the window one day towards the end of break. School breaks were always specially depressing for me: I could never get round to doing anything. I knew that I had not mastered my work, but I didn't
feel like reading it over. The slight feeling of anxiety I felt regarding the next lesson was always completely overshadowed by a much larger anxiety regarding life altogether, by a nagging premonition that the days to come would be just as empty and meaningless as the days that had gone...
And so I walked up and down with my hands in my pockets unable to do anything, and occasionally I stopped by the window, which was open. As I was standing there, my attention was caught by a remarkable episode that was taking place down below in the playground, just beneath the window. A little boy in one of the bottom classes, a child of about ten or eleven, was lying stretched out on his back with a crowd of other boys around him in a ring. Their faces, most of them anyway, had that expression of malicious curiosity that children and ignorant people have not learnt to conceal. A little boy with broad shoulders and prominent cheek-bones, who looked very strong for his age, was standing inside the ring with a whip in his hand.
‘You are my slave,’ he said to the boy on the ground. ‘You are, aren’t you? Say: I am your slave!’
T am your slave,’ replied the child without hesitating; one could hear that this was not the first time he had said it.
‘Stand up!’ commanded the other.
The boy stood up.
‘Imitate B., what he looks like when he comes into the classroom.’
B. was a teacher who walked on crutches. The boy took a few steps outside the ring, which opened up to make way for him. Then he went back on to the improvised stage and made with his arms and legs the same movements as a man who is walking on crutches. He played the part very well; the illusion was perfect, and the spectators were pleased, but the little actor stood there looking very serious. He had a pale little face and black clothes, perhaps he had lately lost his father or mother.
‘Laugh,’ commanded the other with a slight lash of the whip that was in his hand. The boy tried to obey, but it wasn’t easy. His laughter sounded artificial to start with, but it wasn’t long before he managed to laugh a completely natural laugh, and he turned then towards his ‘master’ as if it was him he was laughing at. But his master already wanted to get his slave to show off new tricks.
‘Say: My father is a filthy creep.’ There was delight on all sides.
‘Laugh!’ - ‘Cry!’
The child started to imitate crying, but now too he entered fully into the emotion he was commanded to put on. The tears stuck in his throat, and he started to cry real tears.
‘Leave him alone,’ said one of the older boys in the ring, ‘he really is crying.’
And then the school bell rang.
*
Some days later he ran past me on the way home from school. I noticed that his jacket was undone at the back.
‘Wait a minute!’ I said, ‘your jacket has come undone at the back.’
‘No it hasn’t,’ he said, ‘they have cut it open with a penknife.’
‘Did they mess up that book for you as well?’ I asked.
‘Yes, they threw it into the gutter.’
‘Why are they so nasty to you?’
T don’t know. They are bigger than I am.’
He didn’t know any other reason. But it probably wasn’t the only one. There must have been something about him which irritated them. I could see that he wasn’t like the others. The exception, the failure to conform, always irritates children and common people. The eccentricities of a schoolboy are punished by the teacher with a kindly admonition or a dry satirical smile; but they are punished by the other boys with kicks and punches and a bloody nose, with a tom jacket, a school cap carefully placed under a drainpipe and one's best book thrown into the gutter.
*
So now he is an actor. That was pretty well a case of
predestination. Now he talks to a big audience from the stage. It would be strange if one day he should become famous. I believe he does have the talent. Perhaps then he would gradually make his exception into the paradigm, which other people would have to learn to obey like well-behaved regular verbs.