TRUE STORY
THIS is no story for serious folk. Nobody will be either the wiser or the better for reading it, and it has no meaning in particular. Furthermore, it happened so long ago that there is no reason for telling it; but at least it is true, and truth should always be held in reverence.
My maternal grandmother says that the winter was the coldest she ever experienced, and that I believe; she never made use of a falsehood except when there was some reason for it. What winter it was doesn’t matter anyhow, it is nobody’s business; however, this winter it happened to be. It was a perfectly frightful winter. My grandmother had a tomcat that sometimes used to come home a bit late in the evening, and so one night he was locked out. In the morning his nose was completely frostbitten, so that he went about with a tipsy expression all the rest of his life. This was the more to be regretted because he had always been an uncommonly sober and steady cat, and I have to confess that I wept bitter tears the first time my grandmother told me the story. This might also have come from the fact that my grandmother described everything in such a vivid and emotional way.
But time heals all sorrows, the cat is dead, and moreover he has nothing to do with the story.
Let me see. Ah, yes .... There was once a small wooden footbridge. It was in one of the poorer districts of the city, in Söder or Kungsholm, or possibly it was in old Lumber
town; it was here in Stockholm anyhow. It was a fairly old bridge and had been used throughout its existence as a short cut from the street to Wolberg the grocer’s orchard lot by a troop of laughing and crying and quarreling children. In this way the bridge had become spoiled by a life of activity and happy comradeship. But this winter it was suddenly deserted. Poor people have not always furs for themselves, still less for their children; so the youngsters could only stand a while in their doorways stamping and shivering, till they went in again and sat down in the corner to read their catechisms. That includes, of course, only the best of the children; the others possibly tied curlpapers to the tail of the cat and let him try to catch them, which is very good fun. I have done it myself many times, and furthermore it is a diversion for the cat.
But the bridge had a dull time. I fear it would have collapsed from boredom if it had not had as neighbor and brother-in-contention an old, rather dingy pole, which in the days of oil lamps had done service as a lamp post. Oil lamps were accordingly the only form of lighting that it recognized; but the bridge was of another opinion, so here they had at once a subject for discussion, and discuss it they did. The bridge had, it seems, had what people would call in our day a smattering of education. The little boys had carved it all over with their names and initials and whatever else came into their heads, and then one day a learned man had gone by with his son and had said that the art of writing was the foundation of all enlightenment. This was about the limit of the bridge’s culture, and there
was no reason why it should hide its light under a bushel. But the pole had an answer ready? Previously, in the flourishing days when it had been a lamp post, it had cast its light in at the window of a pale young man, who was reading Rousseau but could not afford to burn a candle. Sometimes he read aloud, and it is very possible that it was to the pole he read—why, of course it was to the pole he read, out of gratitude. The book treated in especial of man’s decline under the curse of civilization. The pole had thought this over during many lonely hours: the curse of civilization. Everyone tries his best to think in this world, even Pascal did the same. The pole for its part had now come to the conclusion that by the curse of civilization was simply meant, in the first place, gas lamps, and, in addition to that, any old high-falutin’ bridge which imagined that the scrawls of stupid children had anything to do with enlightenment. As to enlightenment in itself, the pole had seen rotten wood glow in the dark, though of course not as brightly as gas lamps; but the bridge was painted and, even though that had been a long while ago, it couldn’t give out any illumination now, no matter how rotten it was.
This was an ill-natured line of argument, far more so than was required; and with that the spring thaw set in. The sun shone, melting snow dripped from the roofs, and the gutters became seething torrents, which with the well known contempt of youth for everything old and time-honored dragged with them a lot of snowed-in lobster shells and the earthly remains of an old fish stew that was
starting to smell abominably. Yes, it was truly spring, and grass began to sprout between the cobblestones. In front of every house was a little stairway, and on every stairway emerged a cat. My grandmother’s disreputable-looking cat lay on her stairs, lapping the sunshine, while it purred contentment; on a neighbor’s steps lay the cat that had had a curl-paper on its tail, and so on along the whole street. And in grocer Wolberg’s orchard there was new life, buds expanded and became big green leaves, and over the old bridge the cherry trees leaned their boughs, heavy with snow-white bloom; and then it was summer.
Out of a gateway poured a stream of children, some clean and some dirty. They went over the bridge with a rush, and the old bridge’s heart swelled with delight. But last of all came the grocer’s Carl Johan, puffing and panting. He was very fat, though not as fat as his papa. He too had to cross and he struck the planking so that it crackled, but over he got.
"I’m very fond of children,” the bridge sighed, “but Carl Johan is too heavy; yes, he’s much too heavy.”
The action of the story now has to do with a city councilman, but he was not one of those we have nowadays; no, he was of quite a different sort. People in the world of old were not at all as they are now, and city councilmen are also human. One ought not to speak worse of them than of others, for one knows what one is but one does not know what one may become. Well, two old gentlemen came walking up the slope, and one of them was a city council
man. He often had to walk this way in the evening and had always been annoyed at the bad lighting; there was not a gas light in the whole alley. But now he had arranged that there was to be a light, and he therefore stopped right in front of the pole, poked at it with his stick both above and below, then said to the other man, who was from the gas works, “Rotten it is, but it will stand as long as the Lord wills, till it falls. We’ll take it and put a gas light on it, we will so.”
“That’s very handsome of him,” thought the lamp post, “though he might have put it a little more politely.” In an instant it felt its philosophy of life totter, the half, namely, which had to do with gas lights. (The part which dealt with the bridge it kept undisturbed.) It perceived clearly now that the gas light was only a further development of the oil lamp, and it resolved to keep pace with the times. Then black fellows came with pickaxes and shovels to dig up the earth and lay the gas pipes, after which others came and set up the light. What a light! They rubbed and scrubbed it all over, and finally a painter came and laid a bright green coat of paint on the old pole.
But it is not everyone who can bear good fortune. It was soon perceptible that success was going to the old pole’s head, especially now that it had, so to speak, got a sort of head. “Are you still alive, you old ramshackle bridge?” it called as loud as it was able. “Wait a bit, you’ll see now what enlightenment means. But as far as that goes you may spread yourself where you please. I’m an old friend of
yours and I may as well tell you frankly that it’s rather tasteless of you to stay around here littering up the place now that you no longer fit in with your environment. You needn’t be angry, I’m speaking for your own good.”
This was very ill said, one cannot deny that. One might almost refuse to believe it was true. But my grandmother was sitting by her open window at the time, reading in her big prayer-book, just as she still does; and she heard every word. And she saw with her own eyes that the bridge trembled with mortification, for it is not pleasant in one’s old days to hear oneself proclaimed superfluous. However, the old bridge was undeniably getting shaky and had for itself no higher wish than to pass away decently. And that was precisely what it did, the end even came about quite in the grand style. Just as the lamplighter appeared coming up the hill, the bridge felt the ground quiver beneath it, and through the orchard lot the whole troop of urchins came rushing, to rattle over the bridge and vanish through the doorway across the street. After them came the fat Carl Johan; he was fatter than ever, though still not as fat as his papa. Carl Johan started to cross, but the bridge crashed under him right against the lamp post, the lamp post went down along with it, and the gas light was splintered into a thousand pieces.
There they lay, and that was the end of them. Carl Johan was smashed too, but he is supposed to have been put together again later. Many people streamed to the spot from all directions, among whom was my grandmother
with her cat. Finally the lamplighter arrived, but as he was a professional man and a veteran in his craft—for he had been a lamplighter thirty-six and a half years—he soon realized he could not light the lamp that night; so no more he did.