The Sixth Sense
Once upon a time there was a princess...
We did not know she was coming until suddenly she was standing among us, beaming with life, glittering with diamonds and wearing an enormous Asiatic order on her generously proportioned bosom. A deathly hush fell upon the room. The hostess rushed towards her with outstretched arms, flushed with delight that she actually had come; for she was not just an ordinary princess. She was not the daughter of some king or emperor, but the daughter of Lundholm the tanner in Södermalm, and she was the widow of a Kalmuckian diplomat who had held the legitimate title of a prince because he was related on his mother’s side to the Khan ofBukhara and was descended through his paternal grandmother in direct line from the immortal Genghiz Khan. She was immeasurably rich. She had a desert in Turkestan with fishing rights in the Aral Sea, a castle in the Causasus, a hotel on the Avenue Ruysdael and a house in Tjärhovsgatan.
After a while we settled down again. It was a small select gathering. Two or three important poets, a few important painters and composers and an important leading actor, together with some ministers of state and attachés.
I paced up and down the room and I sniffed now and then at a giant pale-blue agapanthus which the most beautiful of all the ladies had taken from her belt and given me as a token of secret understanding. But it no longer had any scent. And occasionally, as my thoughts wandered, I drank a glass of some alcoholic beverage. Our host, the affable Consul General, asked me what I thought about Nordlund, the murderer. I replied that I could not approve of his conduct.
The princess was sitting upon a gilded table relating tit-bits of information about her visits to several of Europe’s courts. The King of Denmark had joked with her. The Prince of Wales had served her a cup of tea. She also said something about Princess May of Teck. She talked about these things in a perfectly ordinary way, without any affectation, and she did not appear to regard them as unduly important. The ladies made a circle round her and listened with tears in their eyes.
‘How natural and charming she is! ’ the girls whispered to each other. ‘You would hardly believe she is a princess.’
I approached the lady who had so very kindly given me an agapanthus.
‘Madam,’ I whispered, ‘I love you.’
‘Yes,’ she replied, ‘isn’t she absolutely delightful!’
In the smoking room sat the poets talking shop. One of the painters was improvising on the piano. The leading actor stood motionless in the middle of the floor, like a statue.
Suddenly the Princess leapt gracefully down from her table and switched off the electric light. Then she sat down on a cushion on the floor. The ladies let out a cry of delight and made a gypsy-camp all round her. She began to talk about ghosts and spirits and God in a light, chattery tone, as unaffected and natural as a moment before when she had been talking about the King of Denmark. The painter stopped improvising, the poets issued forth out of the smoking room like bears coming out of their lair, and our host, the Consul General, took me aside and whispered:
‘You had better try to keep serious now.’
The lady who, with an air of incomparable pleasure, had loosened an agapanthus from her belt and given it to me was now sitting at the feet of the Princess and gazing into her eyes as she spoke of ghosts and spirits and God. And Mary of Bethany never wore so beatic an expression as she lay at the feet of the Master.
‘Yes,’ one of the poets said, ‘the Princess is quite right: there are ghosts. Out in the country, where I live, we have a ghost that wears a black coat and a top hat. It often moves past me in the dark when I cross the hall. Its favourite place is by the telephone.’
A slight shudder went through the whole company. Once could feel it in the air.
‘My housekeeper has seen it too, and so have the maids. My housekeeper says the ghost's name is Gavelius or Gavell or something like that. However, I would not consider if justified to argue from the existence of ghosts, which is indisputable, to the existence of God or the immortality of the soul.’
The Princess gave him an indulgent smile and reproached him amiably with a raised forefinger:
‘Doubter!’ she said. ‘And you, who have the sixth sense! You do have it, you must not deny that. It is more finely developed in you than in most people, otherwise you would not be the poet that you are.’
The poet did not reply. He was also deep in thought.
‘Excuse me, Princess,’ I shyly broke in, T have admittedly never had the privilege of seeing a ghost on my own account, but my grandmother has seen any number of them. Nearly all old ladies see plenty of ghosts; it would therefore never occur to me to question their existence. But I have never heard my grandmother speak of the sixth sense. She became acquainted with her ghosts exclusively by means of the usual five senses: mostly by vision, quite often by hearing or feeling, not so often by taste and smell. I think I once read in an English novel about a ghost that consisted only of a nasty taste in the mouth. What would we be actually supposed to do with the sixth sense?’
‘You have completely misunderstood me,’ the Princess replied in a rather cold tone, shaking her head with impatience. ‘The sixth sense is perhaps a misleading expression, I will concede you that - it is not to be understood as a “sense” of the same kind as the other five and on the same level - no, it is a spiritual gift of an infinitely higher nature. I would characterize it as an inborn leaning towards spirituality, a sense for the higher things in life, an ability to guide one’s lower, outward senses so that one can see ghosts - it is a foolish habit you have of calling spirits “ghosts”, do you call God a ghost? - so that one can see spirits and speak with them and understand them. The sixth sense is
actually present in all of us. In the lower kind of people it is weak, but in higher natures it is lively and well-developed. A time will come when a person will be valued not for the number of ghosts - spirits, I mean - that he has seen, but for their quality.
‘In the case of my friend,’ the Princess continued, hardly pausing for breath, ‘in the case of my friend the Baroness von Ehrensteiss* of Trapezunt the sixth sense is especially highly developed. Some time ago she had a conversation with my husband’s spirit. He revealed himself to her in a dream. It was matter of the very highest importance that he had to communicate to her - I cannot tell you what it was, for it was absolutely private. However - yes, you think of course that it was just a dream, like all other dreams - but if you pay attention to one little detail that I will tell you then you will have to change your opinion. My husband - my husband had a birthmark - on one thigh, directly above the knee. Well, this birthmark - which Baroness von Ehrensteiss naturally could not possibly have ever been able to see in the flesh, she could never have had the slightest inkling of its existence - she saw this birthmark quite plainly in her dream!’
There was thoughtful silence. The ladies sat as if they were in church. The gentlemen stared solemnly at their finger-nails or at the clouds of smoke from their cigarettes. I sniffed at my agapanthus.