Satan, The Major and the Court Chaplain
Our host, the affable Consul General, had just tapped on his glass and prayed us be welcome, to which nobody objected. That is the sort of thing one ought to pray if one wishes one's prayers to be answered. The first tepid stream of bordeaux was sliding down our throats like a gentle caress and being united with two sardines in oil and a small glass of gin to form a strange harmony, a mystical prelude before the expansive grandeur and high flights of the full symphony. Down at the end of the table, where I was sitting, there had not been enough ladies to go round, and so I had on one side a court chaplain and on the other a major. I don't know if he was really a proper major, however, for when we all raised our wine glasses and looked to the centre — to the Consul General - he raised instead a glass of mineral water and the eyes under his stem-looking eyebrows wandered out towards the periphery.
The court chaplain, on the other hand, was a proper court chaplain; and since he knew I was an infidel he did not talk to me about the eternal truths, but about the red wine.
‘This is something quite special,’ he said. T noticed that at once. And for me it is most important that the red wine should be good, for I can’t drink anything else.’
And he added in a whisper: ‘The stomach is playing up.’
I nodded agreement, rather absent-mindedly. Across the table, between flowers and crystal decanters, I saw a lady’s face. Her skin was white and her lips were red. She was watching me as she sipped at her wine; at least that's how it seemed to me. And all the while she kept showing the tip of her little red tongue be-tween her lips and moving it about. It was looking at this that
made me thoughtful and absent-minded.
Suddenly the major's voice of command awakened me:
‘Are you saved, sir?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ I replied without thinking; for I guessed that this was the only certain way of getting away from the table without being saved.
The major looked rather baffled. He had not expected that answer; for I do not really look as if I have been saved. He took a drink of water and said no more.
A little string ensemble hidden behind a curtain played a Spanish dance in subdued tones.
The chaplain’s head, which seemed to hang loosely on its stalk like a ripe fruit, nodded slowly in time with the music.
‘There is a god in that music,’ he said.
The major stared deep into his glass of water, like one who sees visions. Suddenly he went pale and pushed the glass away. But the next moment he picked it up again and stared down into it biting his lips together; and then he passed it to me.
‘Would you tell me if you can see anything,’ he said.
I then in my turn stared into the glass, but I saw nothing apart from bubbles of carbon dioxide rising up like souls that have been saved.
I told him I could not see anything.
‘It is the music,’ he said. ‘Satan is in that music.’
‘What is it you can see in your glass, major?’ I asked.
‘Do you see that lady over there, sitting and putting out her tongue? I can see her in the glass. And I see her stark naked!’
‘Do you mind if I have another look?’ I said.
And I stared very long and intently into the glass of water.
‘No,’ I said at last, I can see nothing at all. Perhaps you should have a glass of wine.’ He put a few drops of wine into the glass, but instead of drinking he went on staring down into the liquid, which was now faintly reddish.
‘It is gone now,’ he said at last.
He took a deep breath and mopped the cold sweat from his brow with his napkin. ‘If only she would stop putting out her tongue!’
I looked again at the lady over there between the flowers. The tip of her little red tongue was constantly peeping out between her lips, and she kept looking in our direction while this happened. I really did start to believe that she wanted to lead us into temptation, or at least one of us.
‘Oh well, you are probably right,’ said the major. T may just as well drink wine, since it is plain that Satan is everywhere, in the water too.’ And with that he filled his glass to the brim, said ‘skål? with me, and emptied it in a single draught.
‘Yes,’ he continued, ‘Satan is everywhere. There is no way of evading him, one must take him by the horns and keep him down as well as one can. The other day I had been on guard at the palace and I was on my way home wearing my full dress uniform with my plumes on display. And I tell you I met Satan with every step I took, in fact he went with me all the way. As I was walking up Lejonbacken he whispered to me: “Feiff.” he said, “that is the Minister of War just in front of you. He must be too fat to pass through the eye of that needle, you know that very well. You had better go up and have a word with him about his soul. Who knows, you might be sowing the first seed of his salvation.” But I realized at once that it was Satan and took care not to do his bidding.’
‘Excuse me,’ I asked, ‘but how could you know that it was Satan that spoke to you like that?’
‘Well, I will tell you. I knew in my own mind that I was annoyed with the Minister of War because he had been standing right in front of me throughout the audience so that the king hardly saw me. Now the spirit that was urging me to speak to him began with the fact that he was so fat, and so I realized that it must be the Devil tempting me through my jealousy.’
I found nothing to object to in this. The major went on:
‘And then I came down to Norrbro Bridge. There I met two girls - you know the sort... They looked at me as I passed by and showed me their tongues, just like the lady over there. Then I heard Satan speaking to me for the second time: “Feiff,” he said, “you must not let slip the chance of speaking to those girls and trying to convert them.” And this time Satan spoke so like God
himself that I stopped in the middle of Norrbro Bridge and turned round to face the girls, all dressed up as I was. And the girls turned round too, and showed me their tongues. Only a very little bit, of course; not like a street-boy sticking out his tongue, but only a little red tip showing between their lips, just like the lady over there. “Well, Feiff,” said Satan, “hadn’t you better go up to them then? Are you afraid it might look rather bad? Are you a coward, old Feiff?” I was still hesitating and listening for something that might show me what to do. But then Satan became more cunning than before and said: “You can safely go and talk to those girls, Feiff; there is no need to worry that it might be misinterpreted. Everybody knows you are a serious, religious person; if you wanted to, you could even go and flirt with those girls and people would still think you were trying to convert them.” That time he was plain enough, I should think, wouldn’t you?’
‘Yes,’ I said, ‘that time he was quite plain. I think I might even have been able to recognize him myself if it had happened to me.’
The major continued:
‘I crossed over Gustav Adolf’s Square. The sun was shining, and people were looking at me. And Satan whispered to me that at sixty years old I still cut a pretty good figure with my feathers on display. That’s the sort of nonsense he talks all the time - I don’t take any notice of it. Well, then I came into Arsenalsgatan. And there I met a really decrepit old woman. She bowed to me as deeply as she could and said: “Please, general, give a poor old woman a few coppers for a drink.” Without stopping to think or to listen to what Satan might have to say to me I took out a 25-öre coin and gave it to her. I had no sooner handed it over than I realized that this had been one of Satan’s deeds. What was it I had done? Consider for yourself: I meet an old woman asking for money. Because the weather is fine and the sun is shining on my uniform and my medals and the old woman calls me “general” though I am really only a major in the reserve, she gets the coin. Have I done a good deed? Far from it. The old woman is sure to spend the money on drink - she said so herself, but I didn’t pay
attention to that until afterwards. Having the coin will not make her any better or any happier; she will be even worse and more wretched than she was before. “Rubbish!” I hear Satan whispering in my ear, “the old hag has already fallen as low as she can fall anyway, and your little coin won't make a scrap of difference.” But I refused to listen to him. I crossed over to the pavement on the other side to see where the old woman would go. She was still standing in the doorway of the Commercial Bank begging. I walked up and down pondering what I ought to do. I couldn’t really go up to her and ask for the coin back. But I also couldn’t answer for myself if I were to let her go and spend it on drink. What was I to do? I think I walked up and down there for best part of an hour keeping an eye on that old woman. In the end she did move: she went up the street to St James’s Square and turned the comer into Trädgårdsgatan; and I followed her. I soon caught up with her and started talking to her about her soul. But she was no more capable of talking than walking properly; she just wanted to get inside a pub. I tried to explain in words she could understand, and I even went so far as to compare the kingdom of heaven with an exceptionally big, bright, splendid pub. But I think she preferred little, dark pubs. I started to get tired of the whole thing, and Satan whispered to me: “Feiff,” he said, “leave the old woman alone. A couple of officers are coming along over there and they are laughing at you already.” But I persevered with the old woman. The officers came up to me and saluted; I saluted in return, and they did not laugh. “Feiff,” said Satan, “you could at least go into a doorway with the old woman; it looks as if you are trying to show off how virtuously you behave and how little you care what people think.” But I took no notice of him. Instead, I took the old woman home with me and gave her coffee; and the coffee made her a little more sober so that I was able to talk with her. And now she is in the Salvation Army and she doesn’t drink any more, but praises God.’
I listened earnestly as I sipped at my wine. But from the other side I felt the court chaplain prodding me in the arm; and as I turned to him he put his hand in front of his mouth and whispered: ‘That fellow’s not right in his mind.’
‘It depends what one means by “right”,’ I said. ‘But I am quite sure in any case that you are more right-minded.’
The court chaplain looked at me warmly with eyes already clouded by the wine and said:
T know you and I have different views on some matters. But in the case of the so-called “evangelical” movement we are of the very same mind, are we not?’
‘Yes,’ I replied, T am sure we agree in that case. I don’t like evangelicals either. But on the other hand, of course, one has to agree that these so-called evangelicals are the only people in our time who correspond to the first Christians. Are they not, chaplain?’
‘Quite so,’ he said agreeably, ‘Of course, of...’
He broke off suddenly and stared into the air before him. He was a real court chaplain, accustomed to agree with all sorts of things. When he talked with his God he made a quite definite effort to be as accommodating as possible, and if he had met Satan in a doorway he would have tried very hard to make an agreeable impression on him too.
But possibly the conclusion in this case struck him as somewhat dubious. Of course, one can’t be sure. It is also possible that he in turn had caught sight of the lady who was showing the tip of her tongue, and that may have been the reason why he suddenly broke off and stared out into space.