MARTIN BIRCK’S YOUTH
The Old Street
I
Martin Birck was a small child, who was lying in bed dreaming.
It was a summer evening at dusk, a silent, green dusk, and Martin was walking hand in hand with his mother through a large, strange garden, where the shadows lay dark in the depths of the avenues. On both sides of the path, strange red and blue flowers were growing, swaying to and fro in the wind on their narrow stems. He walked along holding his mother’s hand, looking at the flowers in amazement and not thinking about anything. “You must only pick the blue flowers, the red ones are poisonous,” said his mother. Then he let go of her hand and stopped to pick a flower for her. He wanted to pick a big blue flower that was nodding heavily on its stalk. Such a strange flower! He looked at it and smelt it. And he looked at it again with large, astonished eyes: for it was not blue, but red! It was completely red! And such a nasty, poisonous red! He threw the horrible flower to the ground and trampled on it as if on a dangerous beast. But when he turned round, his mother was gone. “Mama,” he called, “where are you? Where are you, why are you hiding from me?” Martin ran a little way down the avenue, but he could not see anyone and was close to tears. The avenue lay silent and empty, and it was getting darker and darker. At last he heard a voice fairly near by: “Here I am, Martin, can’t you see me?” Now Martin realized: behind the lilac bush, that’s where the voice was coming from, why hadn’t he known straight away?... He ran over and looked; he was certain that was where his mother had hidden. But behind the lilac bush stood Frans from Long Row, making a nasty face
with his thick, sore-covered lips and then sticking his tongue out as far as he could! And what a tongue he had: it grew longer and longer, in fact, it never stopped, and it was covered with small, yellowish-green blisters.
Frans was a little ruffian who lived in Long Row, on the other side of the street. Last Sunday he had spat on Martin’s best new brown jacket and called him a snob.
Martin wanted to run away, but stood as if rooted to the spot. He felt his legs grow numb beneath him. The garden and the flowers and the trees were gone, and he was standing alone with Frans in a dark corner of the yard at home, beside the dustbin, trying to scream, but it felt as though his throat had been tied up...
II
When he woke up, however, his mother was standing by the bed with a clean white shirt in her hand, saying:
“Up you get, little sleepyhead, Maria has already gone to school. And don’t you remember, the pear tree in the yard is to be stripped today? You’d better hurry up if you want to get anything!”
Martin’s mother had blue eyes and brown hair, and in those days her gaze was still smiling and bright.
She laid the shirt on the bed, nodded to him and went out.
Maria was Martin’s big sister. She was nine. She went to school and already knew what a lot of things were called in French.
But Martin still had sleep in his eyes and the confusion of the dream in his head, and could not bring himself to get up.
The blind was up and the sun was shining straight into the room. The door to the kitchen was ajar. Lotta was slouched at the kitchen window talking to somebody; it was bound to be Häggbom, the porter. Eventually Häggbom started singing in a drunken voice down in the yard:
If I were as rich as Solomon now,
And if I had money in masses, Straight to Turkey I would go And buy a hundred lasses.
“What would you do with so many, Häggbom?” asked Lotta. “You who can’t even handle your own missis.”
Martin could not hear what Häggbom replied, but Lotta
began to roar with laughter.
“You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Häggbom,” she said.
That was surely now the porter’s wife coining out into the yard as well; it sounded as if she was throwing out a bowl of dishwater. Then she started telling Häggbom off, and Lotta too. But Lotta just laughed and shut the window with a bang.
Martin lay half awake staring at the cracks in the ceiling. There was one crack that was just like Ma Häggbom if you looked at it in the right way.
The clock struck nine in Ladugårdsland church, and when it had finished chiming, the clock in the room started. Martin jumped out of bed and ran to the window to see whether the pears were still on the tree.
The pear tree in the yard was loved by the cats and the children of the house. It was old and big, and many of its branches were already withered and dead, but the others still produced flowers and foliage every spring and fruit every autumn.
Häggbom's boys were sitting in the tree throwing down the pears, having first stuffed their own pockets full, and down below, a crowd of other children were fighting over each pear as it fell from the tree. In the middle of the pack stood Mrs Lundgren, broad and high-voiced, trying to ensure that justice was done to all, but nobody was paying any attention to her. Some way off, little Ida Dupont was standing with wide-open eyes and her hands behind her back; she did not dare enter the fray. Mrs Lundgren did not bother getting a pear for her, since she was not on speaking terms with Mr Dupont, who was a cellist in the Royal Opera House Orchestra.
Martin grew eager, threw on his clothes at breakneck speed and went downstairs.
Lotta shouted after him:
“Shouldn’t you get washed and comb your hair first?
But Martin was already in the yard. Mrs Lundgren immediately took him under her wing.
“Throw down a pear for Martin, John! Hold up your cap, dear, then you’ll get a pear
A pear landed in his cap. But now Martin was unable to find his penknife; he wanted to peel the pear.
“Give me the pear, I’ll peel it for you,” said Mrs Lundgren.
She took the pear, bit into it with her large, yellow teeth and tore off a bit of the peel. Martin’s eyes widened and he went very red. Now he didn’t fancy a pear at all.
Mr Dupont was slouched at his window in his shirtsleeves, smoking his pipe, with a red skullcap on his head. Now he leaned out and laughed at Mrs Lundgren.
Mrs Lundgren got cross.
“That child is spoilt,” she said.
Now John triumphantly held up the last pear, and the children cheered and shouted, but John stuffed the pear into his trouser pocket. Then Willy came across one more, which was the very last one. He caught sight of Ida Dupont standing over by the wall, with tears in her eyes, and nobly threw his pear into her pinafore. Then another cheer went up: the pear tree had been stripped.
But now Ma Häggbom came outside.
“My God, what a racket, and with Häggbom at death’s door! Get down from that tree, you great louts!”
Häggbom had been ill some time ago, and his wife’s imagination often drifted back to that comparatively happy time.
The boys had come down from the tree; she got hold of John by the hair and Willy by the ear and was about to lead them indoors. Mrs Lundgren felt a bit put out; she had, as it were, presided over the performance. Besides, quarrelling amused her, so she didn’t miss the opportunity of pointedly telling Ma
Häggbom how out of place her behaviour was. Ma Häggbom let go of her boys so that she could put her hands on her hips, and a great row developed. An audience flocked to the scene, and all the kitchen windows were thrown wide open.
Finally a voice broke into the quarrel:
“Sh! The Under-Secretary!”
Complete silence fell. Under-Secretary Oldthusen had the biggest flat and was the most distinguished tenant of the building. He was wearing a long, closely fitting coat and carrying a small leather briefcase under his arm. When he had descended the staircase, he stopped and took a pinch of snuff, after which he walked slowly out through the doorway with the preoccupied and worried expression of a statesman.
Martin and Ida sneaked out into the street, hand in hand. They ventured a few steps outside the doorway, then stopped in the middle of the street, blinking at the sun.
The street was lined with wooden houses, tiled roofs and green trees. The house where Martin lived was the only big stone building in the whole street. Long Row, diagonally opposite, lay in shadow: a low, dirty-grey line of houses. Only the really poor people lived there, said Martin’s mother. Only the rabble, said Mrs Lundgren. In the dyehouse a little further down the street there was nothing doing; the dyer was standing at his door in his slippers and white linen coat, talking to the woman from the shop. Even outside the pub on the corner it was quiet. A brewer’s cart was stopped in front of it; the horse was standing with his forefeet bound, eating oats out of a bag hung round his muzzle.
The clock struck ten in Ladugårdsland church.
Ida pointed down the street:
“Here comes the goat woman.”
The goat woman was coming with her two goats. One she was leading on a string, the other was walking freely. The Under-Secretary’s little granddaughter had whooping cough and drank goat’s milk.
“Yes, and here comes the rag-and-bone man.”
The rag-and-bone man shuffled in through the doorway, with his sack on his back and his black, greasy stick. People said he had seen better days.
Two drunks came out of the pub and tottered up the street, arm in arm. A police constable in white linen trousers was walking up and down, a copy of The Fatherland newspaper sticking out of his back pocket. A flock of hens marched out of the yard at Long Row with the cockerel at their head. The policeman stopped, took half a French loaf out of his back pocket and started to feed them.
“What shall we do?” asked Ida.
“I don’t know,” replied Martin.
He looked quite helpless.
“Do you want my pear?”
Ida took her pear out of her pocket and held it under Martin’s nose. It looked very tempting.
“We can share it,” suggested Martin.
“Yes, let’s share it.”
“But I haven’t got a knife to peel it with!”
“It doesn’t matter. You bite first, then I’ll bite.”
Martin bit, and Ida bit. Martin forgot that he had wanted the pear peeled.
Now someone was calling Martin, and the next moment Grandmama came out and took him by the hand.
“What in the Lord’s name do you think you’re playing at today, Martin? Aren’t you going to comb your hair and get washed and have breakfast? The deuce take you, what a boy!...”
Grandmama was supposed to be angry, but Martin just laughed.
In the entrance they met Häggbom. He was already walking a little unsteadily. He veered out of the way and raised his cap very politely, all the while slurring his tune:
Straight to Turkey I would go
And buy a hundred lasses.
In the yard all had gone quiet. Ma Häggbom’s fat ginger cat lay purring on top of the dustbin with his eyes half shut, and down below the rats scampered in and out.
III
One grey morning in October, Martin got permission from his mother to go down to Ida Dupont’s to play. Mr Dupont had two small rooms on the first floor. At this time of day, he was at rehearsal with the Royal Opera House Orchestra, so Martin and Ida were alone.
It was a dark and gloomy day. The inner room lay in twilight with a high Venetian blind in front of the window. If you pushed aside a small comer of the blind, you could see part of the big black dome of Ladugårdsland church between two grey gables. Ding-dong, went the bells.
Ida showed Martin a peepshow with coloured pictures. There were white castles and gardens with coloured lanterns in glimmering rows, yellow ones and red ones and blue ones. There were strange towns with churches and bridges, steamers and big ships on a wide river. There were sumptuously lit rooms with brilliant chandeliers, but what looked like the flames of candles were just small holes made with pins. It all became so large and vivid when you saw it in the peepshow. It almost moved, it was surely some sort of magic...
“I got that from my Mama,” explained Ida.
“But where is your Mama?”
“She’s gone away.”
Martin looked puzzled.
“Gone away, how come?”
“She’s gone off with a strange man. But sometimes she writes me a letter, which Papa reads to me, and sometimes I get nice things from her, which she sends.”
Martin was very curious. He badly wanted to know more, but didn’t really know if he ought to ask.
Ida took Martin by both shoulders, looking very important.
“Do you know what we’re going to do now?” she asked. “Now we’re going to dress up.”
She pulled open a drawer and started to take out red bodices made of velvet, silk and rep, with endless laces and bows; satin shoes, gloves, silk stockings and long tulle veils - pink ones, white ones, blue ones.
“This stuff I got from my Mama too... when she was in the ballet.”
She took a thin, pale-blue veil with silver sequins and draped it round Martin’s head. Then he was given a red bodice, a transparent silver sash, a white skirt.
“You look so funny,” said Ida. “Just like a girl.”
Martin looked at himself in tire mirror, and they both laughed.
“Come here,” said Ida, “and I’ll draw a soot moustache on you. ”
Martin didn’t think a moustache was appropriate when he was meant to be a girl, but Ida didn’t care about that. She blackened a cork over a candle and drew a big, black moustache on Martin, and she also took the opportunity to blacken her own eyebrows. Then they looked in the mirror again and laughed.
“Oh, how lovely to have black eyebrows!” said Ida. “Don’t you think I’m pretty?”
“Oh yes,” said Martin.
Ida was thinking up all kinds of things.
“If you’re really nice now, we’ll have a party.”
She went to a cupboard and dug out a half-finished bottle of wine and a couple of green glasses. Then she set them out on the dressing table and poured.
Martin’s eyes were popping.
“Are you allowed to do that in front of your Papa?”
“Oh yes. I’m allowed to do anything I want in front of my Papa. My Papa, he’s nice. Is your Papa nice?”
“Yes,” replied Martin.
They toasted each other and drank. It was a good, sweet wine, and it shone so gaily and such a dark red in the green glasses.
Outside, it had started to snow. The flakes were large and heavy; the windowsill was already completely white. This was the first snowfall, and the bells were ringing in the black church: ding-dong, ding-dong. Martin and Ida knelt on a chair with their arms round each other's neck and their noses pressed to the windowpane.
Ida poured out more wine and drank Martin’s health. Then she took down an old fiddle from the wall and started playing it, and as she played she danced and swung a white veil. It sounded so strange when Ida played the fiddle. Martin held his ears, laughed and sang and shouted. But just then Martin’s back started to itch. Then he remembered what his Mama had said, that Ida Dupont had fleas.
--------Martin was inside the sleeping alcove looking round. At the back of the dimly lit space, behind two half-burnt candles, was a picture of the Madonna, below which hung a crucifix.
Martin stared in astonishment.
“What’s that?” he asked.
Ida became very serious and answered softly, almost whispering:
“It’s our religion.”
Mr Dupont was a Catholic.
“Wait a moment,” said Ida, “you sit down over there and keep quiet, and I’ll teach you our religion.”
Ida wrapped herself in pink tulle with gold sequins. Then she
stepped forward and lit the candles beneath the Madonna: two still, clear flames. On a small shelf below the crucifix she lit an incense pastille. The smoke wound upwards in long, blue clouds beneath the curtain of the alcove, and the air became heavy with a strong, spicy scent.
The Madonna shone like a stage queen, in red, blue and gold, and the stars on her mantle twinkled and sparkled in the light of the candles.
Martin was spellbound.
Meanwhile, Ida fell to her knees in front of the Madonna. Her thick, dark-red pigtail shone like bright copper in the candlelight. She mumbled something that Martin couldn’t understand and made strange gestures with her hands.
“What’s that?” asked Martin. “Why are you doing that?” “Sh! It’s our religion.”
Ida carried on inside the alcove. Her big, black eyes had a twinkling radiance. But Martin’s head felt strangely heavy.
“Come here and join in,” urged Ida. “Don’t you think it’s lovely?”
Martin sat down on the edge of the bed and tried to copy Ida’s gestures, but soon he began to nod. His head was becoming so heavy, so heavy.
...Outside it was still snowing, and the church bells were ringing: ding-dong, ding-dong...
When Mr Dupont got home, the children were lying fast asleep on the bed. The candles had burnt right down.
IV
Autumn advanced over the earth, and in the city, where Martin lived, the buildings were grey and black with rain and smoke; and the days got shorter.
When afternoon came and dusk set in, Martin Birck’s father would often sit by the fire, gazing into the flames. He was no longer young. He had a clean-shaven face with clear-cut features, like that of an actor or a priest, and he had a way of smiling to himself without saying anything, which inspired respect and a certain feeling of insecurity. When he smiled like this, however, his amusement was in no way due to any weakness or folly on the part of his fellow men, for there was nothing satirical in his disposition; he was simply smiling at an anecdote he had read in the paper that morning, or at a couple of dogs that had barked at the lions round Charles XIII’s statue as he was walking across the square that afternoon on his way home from the government offices. For Martin Birck’s father was a civil servant. Although his salary was not large and he did not have any private means, he nevertheless managed to see to it that he and his family could lead a comparatively trouble-free existence; his taste was confined to innocent and simple pleasures, and vanity did not drive him to seek the company of those who were his superiors in wealth or rank. He was the son of a craftsman, and when sometimes he thought about his lot in life, he did not compare it with that of his bosses or his better-off colleagues, but instead remembered the poor home he had started out from. He concluded then that he was happy, and wished only that the happiness he possessed should never be
eclipsed. He was fond of his wife and children, and loved nothing on earth more than his home. When he had time off work, he liked working with his hands. He would mend broken furniture and knew, after a fashion, how to repair the old kitchen clock, which had flowers painted on its face and big brass weights on chains. He also made amusing and ingenious toys for his children and nice little ornaments for his wife’s birthdays. Among these was a little temple made of white cardboard. It was decorated with narrow gold bands, and behind a semicircle of slender columns there was a mirror, which appeared to double the number of pillars. To the top of the temple, which was surrounded by a balustrade made from marbled paper, led a spiral staircase also made of cardboard and covered with marble, while in the lowermost step there was a small drawer that could be opened, in which Martin’s mother would find a folded bank-note or a little piece of jewellery on her birthday every year.
He also loved music and song. He liked to sing student songs with an old schoolfriend, Uncle Abraham, who sometimes came to visit, and he could improvise at the piano and play several pieces from his favourite operas by ear.
But he seldom read anything other than his newspaper.
Martin Birck’s mother would often sit playing the piano and singing when dusk set in. Her voice sounded lovelier than all other voices, and she would sing songs that no-one sings anymore. Then Martin and Maria would stand behind her stool listening with delight, and sometimes they would try to join in. There was a song about a soldier who cherished a hipflask from which he had given a dying prince a drink on the battlefield. “And the prince drank from it." That was the refrain. And there was another song about a shepherdess who tended her flock in a
valley between steep mountains. The crash of an avalanche was heard, and the girl urged her flock, “Make haste, make haste, my lambs!” As Mama sang, her hands glided over the yellowed keys of the piano; the sound of the strings had a brittle, glasslike quality, and the pedals sighed and moaned. But one of the bass strings was broken and would hum along now and again.
It sounded so desolate when she had finished singing.
Martin was drifting about. It was as if the rooms became larger and emptier when dusk set in.
Finally he turned to Grandmama, who was sitting by the window reading the daily newspaper.
“Please, Grandmama, tell me a story,” begged Martin.
But Grandmama didn’t know any new stories, and Martin had already heard the old ones so many times. Grandmama carried on reading the paper with her glasses a long way down her nose.
“Good Lord,” she said suddenly, looking up from her paper, “did you see that a Miss Oldthusen has died?”
“What, is she dead?” said Martin’s father. “Could that be a sister of the Under-Secretary?”
“Heavens, no, it was his aunt,” said Grandmama. “Her name was Pella - Pella Oldthusen. I remember her quite well -I met her in Vaxholm many years ago. She was a damn quickwitted and funny old girl, but she had light fingers. Her acquaintances used to say, ‘My dears, don’t leave anything lying about tonight, Pella Oldthusen’s coming!’ And she had a girl that she had adopted. When this girl was to be kitted out for her first communion, Miss Oldthusen stole her old maidservant’s linen petticoats, which were hanging in the same wardrobe as her own clothes, and had them altered to fit the girl. Yes, that’s God’s own truth, I heard it myself from a lady who knew her and the whole family well. ‘My dear ma’am,’ said the servant, who had been in her service for many years
and knew her ways, ‘my dear ma’am, there have been thieves in the wardrobe! And just think how awful: they’ve stolen all my petticoats, but not yours, ma’am, though they were hanging right beside them.’ - ‘Can you imagine such villains?’ said Pella. ‘It’s a dreadful shame, but there’s nothing I can do about it.’ However, she gave the maidservant money for new garments some time afterwards, since she was well off and wasn’t mean, but the girl was allowed to go to holy communion wearing stolen petticoats.”
Martin and Maria listened with their mouths agape. So Grandmama had told a story after all. And she knew plenty of stories of this kind.
Papa had lit a cigar and moved his chair nearer the fire. Then he beckoned to Martin and Maria:
“Come along, children, let’s play. ”
The fire had almost burnt out. Papa broke up two or three empty matchboxes and used the pieces to build a house inside the front of the stove. He also inserted a lot of matchsticks to form pillars and beams, and lastly he rolled a cone from a piece of stiff paper: that was a tower. In the tip of the cone he cut a hole for the chimney. It became a magnificent castle with colonnades and spires and turrets, just like the old Stockholm castle in Dahlberg’s Svecia*. When it was finished, Papa set fire to each comer.
It fizzled and sparked and blazed.
“Look - oh look, how it’s burning! - Now the furthest comer is catching fire. — Now the eastern vault’s burning, now it’s caving in! And the tower’s burning - the tower’s collapsing. —
“-----Now it’s all over.”
“Again. Papa,” begged Martin, “oh, again! Just once more!”
“No, not any more,” said Papa. “It’s no fun second time round.”
Martin begged and implored. But Papa went over to the piano and stroked his wife’s hair.
Martin remained sitting in front of the fire. His cheeks were burning, but he could not tear himself away. It was glowing so brightly deep inside there. It glimmered and glowed and burned.
Finally Grandmama came and drew the damper and closed the doors. Then Martin went over to the window.
The sun was long since gone. The sky had cleared a while ago, but dark masses of cloud were still drifting in broken ranks across the thin, glassy blue of the sky. Long Row lay deep in twilight. The maple and cherry trees in the garden stood leafless, and here and there a lighted window was already glimmering through the dark network of twigs. Down in the street the lamplighter was lighting up. He was old and bent and had a fur cap that came right down to his brow. Now he came to die lamp opposite the window, on the other side of the street. When he lighted it, the whole room lit up. The white lace curtain sketched its broken pattern on the ceiling and the wall, and the arum lilies, the fuchsias and the agapanthus cast fantastic shadows.
It was getting darker and darker.
You could see such a long way from up there - far away over the old, low blocks of wooden houses with gardens. You could see Humlegården park, with the roof of the summerhouse between the bare old lime trees, and a grey shape on the western skyline: that was the Observatory on its hill.
The deep, empty blue of the October sky grew deeper and emptier. In the west it was tinged with a red that appeared dirty with fog and soot.
On the windowpane, which was starting to steam up, Martin was drawing figures with his finger.
“Will it soon be Christmas, Grandmama?”
“Oh, that’s a long way off yet, dear...”
Martin stood for a long time with his nose pressed against the pane, staring at the sky: a melancholy twilight sky with pale red patches between grey clouds.
V
But once the lamp had been lit and they were sitting round the circular table with their work, their book or their newspaper, Martin went away and sat in a comer. For he had suddenly become sad without knowing why. He sat there in the dark, staring into the circle of yellow light, inside which the others were sitting together working or talking, and felt left out and abandoned and forgotten.
It was no use when Maria dug out an old volume of Near and Far to show him Garibaldi and the war in Poland and Emperor Napoleon with his pointed moustache; he had seen it all many times. Nor was it any use when she gave him a scrap of paper and showed him how to fold a salt cellar, a crow and two boats joined together. Martin simply longed, without knowing it, for someone to say or do something that would make him cry. So he sat there, sullen and silent, listening to the rain lashing the windowpane; it had started raining again, and the wind was rattling the glass in tire windows.
“Yes,” he suddenly heard his father say to his mother, “perhaps you’re right about trying to sell the piano and buying a pianino instead on hire-purchase. It doesn’t even stay in tune for a fortnight, and a pianino is a nicer piece of furniture too.”
Martin gave a start at the words ‘sell the piano’. He didn’t really know what a pianino was, but he didn’t think it could be a proper piano; he imagined instead something with a handle that you turn. And he didn’t believe any other instrument could sound as beautiful as their piano. He was well acquainted with every dent and every scratch in the red
mahogany veneer, since he had made most of them himself, and he could recognize virtually every key by its particular shade of colour. Sell the piano! It sounded to his ears like something impossible. It was almost as if he had heard his parents sitting there calmly talking about selling Grandmama and buying an aunt instead.
Martin started crying before he even knew it.
“Mama,” said Maria, “Martin’s crying!”
“Why are you crying, Martin?” asked his mother.
Martin just sobbed.
“He’s tired and sleepy,” explained Grandmama. “Best let him go to bed.”
While Martin, sobbing, did the rounds saying goodnight, Lotta came in with the tea tray. She had a very solemn expression when she announced:
“I have to tell the ladies and gentlemen that Häggbom is dead.”
The room went completely silent. Martin stopped crying.
Grandmama clasped her hands together.
“What, is he really gone now, was it so quick... Good Lord, is he gone? Yes, the drink... But it was probably best for him that he was allowed to die, though it will be hard for the missis - after all, he was the porter and supported his wife and children. ”
“He died at seven o’clock exactly,” said Lotta.
But when nobody made any reply, she went out to the kitchen again.
“It might be an idea to send a condolence list round the neighbours and organize a small collection,” said Mama
Martin was sent to bed. His mother sat on the edge of the bed and said his prayers with him. He was let off after ‘Gentle Jesus, meek and mild’, since he was so tired. Normally he would also say ‘Our Father’ and ‘God bless us’.
Martin lay awake for a long time, listening to the rain splashing on the windowsill. He was not at all sleepy; he had only said so to get out of saying the long prayers that he didn’t understand. For it is impossible for a small child to associate any concept whatsoever with phrases such as ‘hallowed be thy name’ and ‘thy kingdom come’. He lay there thinking about Häggbom and wondering whether he would be allowed into heaven. He did always smell of drink.
Martin was scared of the dark. When Lotta came in with a lighted candle to see to something in the room, he begged her to leave the candle behind.
“You’re to go to sleep, Martin,” said Lotta, “otherwise Häggbom will come and get you.”
She went out, taking the candle with her.
Martin started to cry again. The wind was whistling in the cracks round the window, every now and then a door slammed to with a bang, and a dog was howling outside. Before his mother pulled down the blind, Martin had thought there was a red glow in the sky. Perhaps fire had broken out over in Södermalm...
There was noise and trouble down in the street. Drunks coming out of the pub - - blows and yells. - - Heavy footsteps on the pavement, someone running and someone in pursuit -and shouts of “Police, police!”
Martin pulled the covers over his head and cried himself to sleep.
VI
The white winter arrived with jingling sleighbells, snow, and ice flowers on the windowpane. “Those are dead summer flowers that come back,” said Martin’s mother. The fir trees out in the country left their dark solitude for the streets and squares of the city, and when the Christmas bells rang in the feast there was a fir tree in Martin’s home too, dark and timid and smelling of the forest, until evening arrived and it stood twinkling with candles, white candles and coloured candles, and laden with red winter apples and sweets with mottoes that were so stupid that even Martin and Maria could see how stupid they were. All the splendour of Christmas unfolded, it was like turning the pages of a picture book, and when the star of New Year’s Eve was shining above the white roofs, and they bade one another goodnight and said thank you for a pleasant year, Martin thought with a chilling feeling of the string of grey winter days that lay ahead, to which he could see no end; it was so infinitely long till the summer, and still longer till next Christmas. On New Year’s morning, he was woken while it was still dark to go to early service. Still half asleep, he crawled along through the snow beside his parents, and when they got round the corner, Ladugårdsland church was standing there like a huge lantern, shining forth over the white square, towards which people were crawling from all directions. Inside the church there was the swell of the organ, singing and a lot of twinkling candles, and Martin felt happy and good and thought this was just the right way to begin the new year. When the priest started preaching, he fell asleep straight away. When he woke up, the
grey light of dawn was already shining in through the windows of the dome, and his mother was shaking him and saying, “Now let’s go home and have coffee.”
Then they went home with their hearts hill of the noblest resolutions; Martin realized of his own accord that it was some such thing the priest had preached about. Later that morning, Martin and Maria were sent round on New Year’s visits to Uncle Jaime and Aunt Louisa and other aunts and uncles, and were invited in for cakes and wine and goodies from the Christmas trees. But at Uncle Abraham’s there was no Christmas tree, since he was a widower with no children, who lived on his own with an elderly housekeeper. Uncle Abraham was a doctor and had cured Martin and Maria of measles and scarlet fever and chesty coughs many a time. He had a black beard and a long, crooked nose, being Jewish. He also had a parrot, who could swear in French, and a black cat. This cat was called Kolmodin and was the cleverest cat in the world, because when he was standing outside the hall door wanting to come in, he didn’t just mew as other cats do, but would get up on his hind legs, fasten his claws on the bell-pull and pull on it very hard.
When Martin and Maria arrived this New Year’s Day to wish Uncle Abraham a happy new year, he was sitting alone with a bottle of wine on the table, playing chess by himself.
The room was large and dusky and full of books. Outside, the snow was falling in large flakes. Uncle Abraham stuffed their pockets full of goodies and got the parrot to swear in French and was very nice to them; but he didn’t say very much, and Kolmodin the cat sat in front of the fire that was glowing in the stove, staring gloomily at his master. Martin and Maria sat there in silence, looking at each other and feeling uneasy. For they had heard their parents say more than once that Uncle Abraham was not a happy person, and that he was never really cheerful.
VII
And so the new year was here. The almanac that Martin had given his father as a Christmas present had red edges, whereas the old one had had blue. Martin found to his surprise and disappointment that this was the only difference he could see between the new year and the old, that the days passed as they had passed before, with bells, snow and overcast skies, getting bored with the same old games and the same old stories, and longing to grow up. He longed for this day but also dreaded it. For Mama had so often pointed to the rag-and-bone man, who had seen better days, and said that if Martin didn’t eat up his gruel and generally behave like a nice good boy, then he would end up as a rag-and-bone man just like that when he grew up. When his mother spoke like this, his heart sank, and he saw himself creeping in through the doorway with a sack on his back and poking in the dustbin with a black stick, while Papa and Mama and Maria and Grandmama sat together round the table as before. For it never occurred to him that his home could be broken up and dispersed.
The snow fell, a lot of snow. The snowdrifts grew, and it was sparkling cold. Martin had to stay indoors with his ABC book and his multiplication tables, with his paintbox and his jumping jacks and all the faded splendour that Christmas had left behind. Among the jumping jacks was one called the Red Turk that he liked better than the others, because Uncle Abraham, who had given it to him, had said that it was the funniest jumping jack in the world. “You see,” he said one evening, “in itself it may be neither funny nor remarkable that
a cardboard man should jump when you pull his strings. But the Red Turk is no ordinary cardboard man, he has thoughts and opinions just as we do. And when you pull the strings and he begins to jump, he says to himself, T am a being with free will, I jump about exactly as I want to and entirely for my own pleasure - whoopee, what fun to jump about!’ But when you stop pulling the strings, he thinks he’s tired and says to himself, ‘I’m blowed if I’m jumping about any more, the nicest thing of all is to hang on a hook on the wall and stay completely still.’ Yes, this is the funniest jumping jack in the world!”
Martin didn’t understand much of this, but he realized that the Red Turk was funny and valued him more than he did previously.
So the days passed, and after Twelfth Night came the small family gatherings and the stripping of the Christmas trees and the shadow plays and the puppet shows and the magic lanterns with their gaudy pictures on a ghostly white sheet. On the way home the stars would be twinkling, and Papa would point to the sky and say, “There’s the Milky Way, and there’s tire Plough.”
VIII
But one morning when Martin woke up, he saw that the sky was shining a brighter blue than it had been for a long time and that drops were falling from the roof and the bare branches of the pear tree. As he was sitting up in bed looking out at this bright blue, Maria came in with a twig that seemed to be blossoming in a hundred colours, but they were not flowers, they were multicoloured feathers, and she hit him with the twig and danced and sang that it was Shrove Tuesday and that she had the day off school, hooray! And that there would be buns with marzipan inside for dinner.
They took the feathers off the twig and dressed up in them and played cowboys and Indians; except both of them were Indians.
Mama took the twig and put it by the window in a jar filled with water, right in the sunshine. For the bedroom faced east, which was where the morning sun was. And lo and behold, it was only a few days before small brownish-green buds appeared here and there on the twiglets, they swelled and got bigger, and one day they had opened and turned into crinkled, light-green leaves, the whole twig turned green, and so it was spring.
One afternoon a streak of sunlight fell in the dining room, which faced west.
“Look at the sun, children,” said Mama. “That’s our first afternoon sun this year.”
The streak of sunlight fell on the cut-glass pieces of the chandelier and was refracted, scattering rainbow-coloured patches all over the room, on furniture and wallpaper. Papa was
just passing through the room and set the triangular pieces of glass in motion with a little tap of his hand. A confused dance round the walls by the bright patches ensued, like a dance of fluttering butterflies. Martin and Maria started a hunt for them. They ran about till they were flushed and hot, slapping their hands against the walls, and when they saw a patch of sunlight fall on their hands instead of on the wallpaper, they shrieked with delight, “I’ve got him!”
But the next second ‘he’ slipped away, the streak of sunlight gradually faded, and the butterflies tired of fluttering and shining and vanished - Martin saw the last of them expire on his hand.
But no, it was not spring yet.
Again the snow was falling, wet snow that melted and got dirty immediately, again the bells were ringing in the black dome beneath a grey sky, and it was Good Friday. Martin and Maria were in church, but they were not allowed to sit with their parents, because their parents were sitting far away in the chancel among a crowd of solemn, black-clad people. They too were dressed in black, Papa in a tailcoat and a white tie, and everything was black: the red was gone from the pulpit and the altar and there was black in its place, the priests had black robes on, a black cross rose ominously from the lead-coloured clouds of the altarpiece in the twilit depths of the chancel, and the darkgrey sky stared in through the vaulted windows of the dome. Martin was unable to go to sleep as usual because everything was so eerie: the chorale whined and wailed, the priest looked gloomy and malicious and talked about blood, and a dog was howling outside in the churchyard...
Martin was enchanted by all this, though he didn’t realize it.
No, the spring, the real spring... That didn’t come until the Royals drove out to Djurgården in a golden carriage with plumes. On that day, how it shone, how it shone blue and sunny and springlike round tire chimneys and roofs, round the cockerel on the church tower! In Martin’s street the maples were already blossoming, and above the sloping palings hung clouds of white blossom: cherry blossom and hawthorn. The market-place and Storgatan were swarming with people, the whole city was out of doors, dressed in bright clothes of many different colours, and outside the Life Guards’ barracks the pale-blue Life Guards, whom Martin loved and revered, stood on guard with their sabres drawn. The Royals drove past in a cloud of plumes and gold, the people cheered and Martin cheered too, and then they all went out to Djurgården to drink juice and mineral water at Bellmansro. Fiddles and a barrel organ were creaking all around them, and Martin was completely happy. But on the way home they stopped for a moment to watch the Punch and Judy show. It was starting to get dark over the fairground, but people were still crowding round the puppet show, where Punch was just in the process of beating his wife to death. Martin pressed up close to his mother. He saw mouths open in broad laughter all around him in the dusk, he did not understand any of it, but the sound of the wooden cudgel hitting the doll’s head frightened him -were people laughing because that nasty man up there was beating his wife? Then came the creditor, and Punch beat him to death too, the policeman and the Devil came off just as badly, till at last Death lured him down into his cauldron and it was all over. Martin could neither laugh nor cry; he simply stared, amazed and horror-struck, into this new world that was so unlike his own. On the way home he was tired and frozen. The sun was gone, and it was getting darker and darker. The King had long since gone home to his palace, and drunks were shoving one another and bawling round about them. The wood
anemones that Martin had picked on the edge of the woods had withered, and he threw them away to be trampled into the dirt.
When they finally got home and Martin was asleep in bed that night, he dreamt that his father was hitting his mother over the head with a big stick.
IX
Summer skies and summer sun, a white house among green trees...
In the white house, Martin’s parents had rented several low rooms with rickety white furniture and the bluest of blue blinds at the small square windows. Right outside these windows ran the king’s highway. Farmers’ carts and travellers from the islands of Lake Mälaren streamed constantly by on their way to and from the city, all of them stopping here to pay bridge tolls; the white house was the bridgemaster’s house and stood right beside the approach to Nockeby bridge. Every evening the bridgemaster would sit in his porch, which was surrounded by hopbines, drinking toddy, holding out his moneybox to the travellers, chatting and telling tall stories. He had been a ship’s captain and had visited many foreign countries; but now he was a little, white-haired old chap and, having had a lease on the bridge for many years, was a wealthy man.
On the evening of the first day, when the packing cases, trunks and clothes baskets were still standing all over the rooms, which still looked a little strange, but where every cupboard and chair and every flower on the wallpaper seemed to be saying, “We’ll be good friends soon” - and while the supper of butter and cheese and some small fried fish lay ready by the window, Martin sat quietly on the edge of a chest, looking at the strange new scene: the grey road with the telegraph poles, in which the wind was singing, and the dark silhouettes of the horses, the carts and the countryfolk against the greenish blue of the western sky. On the other side of the
road, a bit to one side, there was a hill with a group of oak trees, their foliage hanging majestic and heavy in the twilight of the summer evening. Among these oaks was one that was bare and black, without the greenery of the others, and in its branches the crows had built a nest.
Martin could not take his eyes off the black tree with the crows’ nest between its branches. It seemed to him that he knew this tree, that he had seen it before or heard a story about it.
And he dreamt about it at night.
Summer skies, summer days. Green meadows, green trees...
The meadows were full of flowers, which Martin and Maria picked and did up in posies for their mother. Maria said to Martin, “Look out for snakes! If you tread on a snake, then he’ll drink you’ve done so on purpose and he’ll bite you.” So Martin trod as carefully as he could through the long grass. She also told him diat it was a great shame to pick the white strawberry flowers, because that was where strawberries came from. And they agreed that whoever got the first glimpse of a strawberry flower would say, “Freedom for this one!” Whoever had said ‘freedom’ on behalf of a flower would get to pick its berry when it grew ripe. When they came to the hillside where the oaks were, it was completely white with strawberry flowers under the trees. Maria was the first to see it and immediately cried, “Freedom for all these!” But when she saw that Martin no longer looked very happy, she suggested straight away that they should share the treasure. So they drew an imaginary line from one tree to another, in this way splitting the whole hillside into two parts. To the right of the line was Maria’s strawberry patch, and Martin’s was to the left. After this, they sat down in the shade under an oak tree and arranged their flowers as they thought best, and Maria showed Martin
how to stick the fine, heart-shaped quaking grass in among the buttercups and the marguerites, and how to tie up the posy using the long blades. But Martin soon grew tired of his flowers, forgetting that he had picked them to give to his mother, and he put them down in the grass, lay down on his back among them and looked up at the clouds drifting across the blue sky above his head. They were like white dogs; shaggy little white dogs. Perhaps they even were little dogs. When people die, they go to heaven; but dogs, who don’t have a proper soul, probably don’t get that far. They are allowed to run about outside, playing with one another. Their masters no doubt come out to see them sometimes, and then the little dogs jump up to their masters, lick them and feel very happy...
White clouds, summer clouds.
But best of all were the big bridge and the lake and all the steamers, which hooted while they were still some distance away for the bridge to open and let them through. Martin soon learned to recognize them all: the Fyris and the Garibaldi, the Brage, which was never in a hurry, the handsome blue Tynnelsö and the brown Enköping, which was known as ‘the coffeepot’ because it spluttered as though someone was brewing coffee. To him, each boat had its own peculiar facial expression, so he was able to tell which was which from a long way off. They also helped him keep track of time. When the Tynnelsö passed through the bridge, it was time to go home and have breakfast, and when the Runan hooted from its husky throat, then the Brage couldn’t be far away, and Papa would arrive from town on the Brage. Then there were the tugboats with their long strings of barges. These barges often used to get stuck in the bridge, and nothing on earth was so much fun as to hear the men on the barges swearing. But on the days when
the lake turned green with white foam and the waves splashed high over the bridge, the steamers were no match for the old boats of the locals when it came to winning first place in Martin’s affections. In every skipper he would see a hero who braved the waves and the storms to reach some unknown and mysterious destination; it never occurred to him that they were only sailing into Stockholm to sell the wood, hay or earthenware that they had on board. Nevertheless, he was not entirely happy about these things, since he was unable to prevent them from arousing in him, against his will, a dark suspicion of some shabby ulterior motive on the part of the skipper; and, in the depths of his heart, he liked the boats that came back empty from town most of all. They danced the most pluckily over the waves too, heading off towards places where Martin had never been, far beyond Tyska Botten and Blackeberg, which were the limits of the known world.
Here too was where the sun went down every evening in a promised land of shimmering red. Martin was absolutely certain that it set just there, immediately behind the headland, and nowhere else. He could see it so plainly. All the same, he did not imagine that the people who lived over there were able to see the sun at very close quarters, or that they needed to worry about being hit on the head by it. If another boy had come up to him and told him such a thing, Martin would have thought him very silly. For it is exactly the same with children as it is with adults: they take the strangest ideas about the world into their heads, but if someone comes along and spells out the consequences of their ideas, they say he is very silly, or that it is not right to joke about serious matters.
Summertime, strawberry time...
In those days the summer was different from how it is now. It was a bliss that filled the days and the evenings, even forcing its way into your dreams at night, and the morning was
happiness itself. One morning Martin woke up earlier than usual, and when he heard a little bird chirping in the privet hedge outside his window and saw that the sun was shining, he sat up in bed intending to get dressed and go outside. Then his mother came in and said that he was to lie still for a little while longer, because it was his birthday and Maria was busy with something outside that he mustn’t see until it was ready. She kissed him and said that he was seven now and must work hard and behave well this summer, so that he shouldn’t need to feel ashamed in front of the other boys when he started school in the autumn. When Martin heard the word ‘school’ he forgot about the bird chirping in the hedge and the sun shining, and felt a lump in his throat as if he would have to cry. But he controlled himself and didn’t cry. He wasn’t entirely certain what school was, but it sounded so horrible and severe. To be sure, his mother had a school for him and Maria, but that was just a short time down at the bottom of the garden every day, in the lilac bower, where the butterflies fluttered - yellow ones, white ones and blue ones - and the bumblebees hummed, while his mother told him stories about Joseph in Egypt, about kings and prophets, and taught him to copy letters of the alphabet. He realized that a real school must be something quite different. But while he was worrying himself about starting school in the autumn, they all came in to congratulate him on his birthday, Papa and Grandmama and Maria. Maria made up to him and curtseyed, saying, “Many happy returns of the day!” Martin was embarrassed, went red in the face and turned to face the wall.
Then he was left alone. But it was not long before Grandmama stuck her head round the door and shouted that the King was coming on horseback with fifteen generals to congratulate Martin, and at that same moment he heard a rumbling on the bridge like thunder. He jumped out of bed and
threw on his clothes, but the noise was getting closer, a cloud of dust was hanging over the road, the horses’ hoofs were thundering against the bridge and the ground, and gleaming weapons were flashing. When Martin got out on the veranda, the men in front were already well past, but his mother consoled him with the fact that the King was not among them. Instead it was virtually his entire army, as there were to be field manoeuvres in the Drottningholm area. There were hussars and dragoons and the whole of the artillery from Stockholm, and the artillerymen, shaken about like sacks of potatoes on their carts, were grey and black with dust and dirt. But Martin admired them all the more because of this and wondered to himself whether it might be even better to be an artilleryman than to be skipper of a boat.
The armed forces passed by and vanished from sight, and a fresh wind came off the lake, taking away the smell of dirt and sweat that they had left behind. When Martin turned round, a little table laid specially for him, which Maria had decorated with flowers and green leaves, was standing beside the breakfast table. Then he felt embarrassed again and turned red, but he was also very happy, since in the middle of the table stood a cake that his mother had made for him, and a big plate full of strawberries that Maria had picked for him under the oak trees, and a twenty-five öre piece from Papa, and a parcel of socks that Grandmama had knitted. Martin liked the twenty-five öre piece most of all. He had already realized that a pair of socks is purely and simply a pair of socks, and a cake is a cake; but a twenty-five öre piece is an infinite number of wishes come true in any direction you like within a certain limit, and experience had not yet taught him how confined that limit was.
Martin went round thanking everybody, tried the cake and the strawberries, saw that the socks had red stripes and were
very smart, and hid the twenty-five öre piece in a matchbox he had to keep money in, where there were already a few old coppers and some small stones he had dug out of the sand and hidden away because they were so pretty.
Then the Brage hooted from up by Tyska Botten and Papa had to leave for town, but Martin was allowed to go to Drottningholm with Mama and Grandmama and Maria. That was where the King had his white summer palace, reflected in the shining bay, and the trees in the park were bigger than any other trees, and the shade beneath them was deep and cool. The swans glided over the dark waters of the ponds and the canals with their necks rigidly upright, and Martin didn’t imagine that they worried about anything on earth apart from their own white dreams.
But Grandmama had a French loaf with her, which she broke into crumbs and fed to them the way people feed hens.
Summer days, happy days, blue cornflowers in the yellow rye...
It was nearly harvest time, and Martin was walking along the road with his mother. Maria was walking on the other side of her, every so often picking a cornflower out of the rye. Their mother was wearing a pink dress and a straw hat with a wide brim, and she was talking to them about mankind and the world, and about God.
“Look, Martin,” she said, “there are the good ears and the thin ears, just like the ones we read about the other day in the bower. You remember, the good ears that bent their heads so heavily towards the ground because they had so many grains of com to bear. The grain is ground to meal at the mill, and meal is used to make bread, and bread is good to eat when you’re hungry. But the empty ears are no use to anyone; the fanner throws them away or gives them to his horse to chew, which doesn’t make the horse any fatter. And yet they stand there so
high and proud, looking down on the other ears that are bowing all around them.”
Martin’s mother broke off the proud, thin ears and showed him that they were completely empty.
“A lot of people are like that too,” she said. “You’ll find that when you grow up. You’ll also find people who go about hanging their heads because they want people to think they belong among the full ears. But in fact they are the emptiest of all.
“But you should also remember, children, that it’s not up to you to judge, either now or when you grow up, whether a person belongs among the full or the empty ears. One human being can never really tell such a thing about another. Only God knows.”
When Martin’s mother talked to him about God, he felt at once solemn and a little embarrassed, more or less as a little dog feels when people try to talk to him as if to a person. When he listened to his mother telling stories about Paradise and Noah’s Ark, he was able to follow them quite well and could picture everything clearly before his eyes: the apple tree and the serpent and all the animals in the Ark. But when it came to the word ‘God’ he was unable to imagine anything definite, neither an old man nor a middle-aged gentleman with a dark beard. Right at the top of the blue vaulted ceiling under the dome of Ladugårdsland church was a big painted eye, which his mother had said was a symbol of God. But the solitary eye seemed to Martin so sinister and sad that he scarcely dared look at it, and it did not help him in the slightest to imagine what God really looked like. He had also had to learn by heart the Ten Commandments that God laid down to Moses on Mount Sinai, but these only served to strengthen his secret suspicion that God was really something that only concerned grown-ups. God could never have been speaking to
Martin when he said, "Thou shalt have no other gods before me.” Martin knew neither what a graven image looked like nor how you would go about serving one. And it went without saying that he would honour his father and his mother. Nor did he feel any temptation to kill or to steal, or to covet his neighbour’s maidservant, ox or ass. And he had absolutely no idea how he would set about committing adultery; but he resolved to try to beware of doing so nevertheless, just to be on the safe side.
“God knows everything, both what is happening now and what is going to happen. He has decided it all himself. And when you pray to God, Martin, you mustn’t imagine that your prayers can induce him to alter his decisions one jot. But God still likes people to pray to him, and therefore you must do so. You must never give up saying your prayers every night before you go to sleep, no matter how big and wise you are. But when you grow up and have to make your own way in the world, then you should never forget that first and foremost you have to rely on yourself. God only helps those who help themselves. And if at some stage in your life you find there is something you want so badly that you don’t think you will ever be happy again unless you get it, then you mustn’t ask God to give it to you. It is better to try to get it for yourself; but if possible, ask him to give you the strength to make do without it. He doesn’t like other prayers.”
Martin Birck’s mother talked in this vein as they walked along the road. And the summer wind sighed all around them, sweeping across the fields so that the corn billowed.
But the bridgemaster, old Moberg, had a lad by the name of Johan. Johan was fourteen or fifteen and soon became Martin’s best friend. He carved bows and bark boats for Martin, and
Martin helped him to crank up the bridge. In the evenings, when he was free, he would also play hide and seek or cops and robbers with Martin and Maria and some other children. But it was neither because of the bark boats nor because of the games that Martin liked Johan so much and admired him so tremendously. It was because Johan always had so many curious stories to tell, about things that Papa and Mama and Grandmama never spoke of. Johan tended to become particularly communicative when it was getting dark, when he and Martin were sitting together on a beam beside the opening in the bridge waiting for a steamer that was due, whose lanterns would sooner or later shoot into view from behind the headland, first the green one and then the red. Then Johan would talk about one thing and another. It might be about old Moberg, who used to see little tiny demons jumping up and down in his glass of toddy, up and down; it was them he was speaking to when he sat there muttering and stirring his glass. But the priest on the island of Lovö was even worse. Now he was really on good terms with Old Nick, the whole parish knew that. And if you thought about it properly, it was plain to see; how else would he be able to stand up there in the pulpit and preach for a whole hour the way he did, where did he get all his words from? What was more, Johan had once been sent to him on an errand and been right inside his study, and had seen with his own eyes that it was crammed full of books from floor to ceiling. Yes, he was certainly in cahoots with the devil! - Or he told the story of a man who had been murdered on the main road three years ago, quite near by, and he described the scene in such detail: It was just there, where the woods are so dense on the one side and on the other side a willow tree stands beside a telegraph pole. It had happened one evening in November, and if you went past the spot at the right time you could clearly hear the groaning in the ditch.-But
they never caught the man that did it.
When Martin heard all this, he held on tightly to Johan’s arm. He felt a weight off his chest when the lanterns of the steamer shone forth through the darkness and drew closer, and he heard the thump of the engines and the captain’s commands, and they had to hurry to crank up the bridge. When they went home together over the bridge, they were both excited by thoughts of ghosts and murder, and Johan said to Martin:
“Listen, he’s coming after us!”
Martin didn’t know whether ‘he’ was the murderer or his victim, but he thought he could hear footsteps on the bridge and didn’t dare turn round; but Johan, who had a cheerful disposition, dispelled his fears by striking up a jolly song and singing to a popular tune:
Yet though I walk in death’s dark vale, Diddleiddleumpumpum!
And Martin joined in and sang along.
But when they reached the bridgemaster’s house, Johan fell silent, and Martin sang by himself at the top of his voice:
Yet though I walk in death’s dark vale, Diddleiddleumpumpum!
The bridgemaster, old Moberg, was sitting in his porch, which was surrounded by hopbines, drinking toddy with two farmers by the light of a round Chinese lantern. He was an old man and drank toddy every evening, and people said that he couldn’t have very long to live. But he was so unwilling to die, and if he heard anyone speak about illness and death, it was as if they had said something indecent; or indeed it was much worse, since indecent things didn’t offend his ears at all, but tickled his fancy. When he saw Martin coming along the road and heard him singing a funeral hymn to the tune of a jolly song
from the streets, he got up and walked a little way down the road with faltering step, stopping in front of Martin. Martin stopped too, immediately fell silent and looked to see where Johan was; but Johan had vanished.
Old Moberg, however, had gone bluish-white in the face, and his voice was trembling when he said:
“And that is supposed to be a child of good family! These are strange times, 1 must say.”
And with that he went indoors, without either finishing his toddy or saying goodnight to the farmers, and went to bed.
Martin was left standing in the middle of the road, and it had suddenly become so quiet round about him. All he could hear was the sound of the farmers’ sticks beating heavily against the road as they went off into the darkness without saying anything.
However, Martin’s parents had heard everything from the veranda at the side of the house.
“Martin, get in here!”
Martin was as red as his neckband was white. Now he was made to explain who had taught him to sing like that. But he said he had thought it up himself. Papa made it clear to Martin how badly he had behaved, and Martin cried and was sent to bed. His mother cried too when she said his prayers with him. She was upset and horrified. For the misdeeds of children, like those of adults, are judged not so much by their actual nature as by the scandal they cause; and Martin’s misdeed had caused a dreadful scandal.
The loveliest days of summer were past. By day it was wet and windy, and the lake turned green. At dusk the crows flapped round the hillside with the oaks and the bare tree.
When it was raining, Martin was allowed to read fables such as ‘The Bee and the Dove’ and ‘The Toad and the Bull’. He also
read about ‘Little One’s Journey to Dreamtown’*:
Little goldfish, like strings of beads,
Swarm in the waters bright.
Little One to Dreamtown speeds;
Must get there tonight.
Nearer, nearer
His goal it draws,
In the moonlight shimmering.
Clearer, clearer
He sees the scores
Of tiny candles glimmering.
The sloop glides onward, it heads for land,
Rows of lanterns pretty
Shine midst the throng on the sounding strand,
The bells ring out in the city.
— The city. Tears came into Martin’s eyes. He had often thought about the city these last few days and wondered whether everything was all right back home. During the winter, Martin would long for the green grass of summer and the strawberries in the woods; but once a string of summer days had passed, and the verdure was no longer fresh, and the dandelions on the lawn were grey with dust from the main road, then he would dream once more of the rows of twinkling lights in town, of Christmas and the snow, and of the grey dusk of a winter’s day in front of the blazing fire.
X
The wheel of the seasons turned full circle, and autumn came round again.
In the city much had changed. Long Row with its gardens and sheds was gone. In its place a large brick building was going up, getting higher by the day, and blocking out both the lime trees of Humlegården and the Observatory on its hill. Everywhere buildings were being demolished and rebuilt, and the hills and slopes of Ladugårdslandet echoed with dynamite every day; and Ladugårdslandet itself was now to be known as Östermalm. And Ma Häggbom had become Mistress Häggbom. If she caught anyone calling her Ma, she answered politely but firmly, “Old habits die hard!”
Martin was going to school, but it was a nice little school and nothing like as bad as he had imagined. It was only to have his lessons, so it was quite all right. And Martin proudly felt his knowledge of the world increasing by the day. Before his very eyes, the boundaries of space and time got further away every day: the world was much bigger than he had ever dreamt, and so old that the mind boggled at the number of years. Looking forward, time had no bounds, it simply vanished into a giddy blue infinity. But if you traced it backward, somewhere away back in obscurity there was at least a beginning, a point where you had to stop: four thousand years before the birth of Our Saviour, God had created the world. Martin’s book of biblical history said so, quite plainly, on the very first page.
And he had created it all in six days. But teacher said that the days had been longer then.
But even if the days of the Creation had perhaps been a little bit longer than normal weekdays, when it came to Methuselah's nine hundred and sixty-nine years then quite the reverse applied. “You see, in those days they didn’t have such long years as we do now,” said teacher.
There were so many new things to learn and understand, and in reality school contained none of the horrors that Martin had associated with it in his imagination.
To make up for this, the way to and from school was fraught with all sorts of dangers and adventures. The nasty creatures known as ruffians, who called Martin and his friends snobs, could be lying in ambush around every corner. Among these ruffians, the worst were the cruel, dangerous ones from the Slough, the area between Humlegården and Roslagstorg, who now and again used to leave their gloomy habitat and take to the warpath, and who were said to use cats-o’-nine-tails with lead pellets. However, Martin was not so afraid of these ruffians from the Slough, whom he had never seen, and of whose existence he was not entirely certain, as he was of the terrible ruffian Frans, who used to live in Long Row and was still living in the same street. For this ruffian put all his thoughts and energies into making Martin’s life a misery by day, even haunting him in his dreams at night.
One day when Martin was on his way home during the lunch break, he came across two of his classmates in a fight with Frans on a street corner. They had already overpowered him and thrown him to the ground and were laying into him with their fists. At the time, Martin had just started reading cowboy books, and he immediately saw in Frans the makings of a noble redskin and didn’t want to miss such a favourable opportunity to make him his friend and ally against other ruffians. So he went up and told his friends how cowardly it was to fight two against one, that Frans lived in his street and was quite a nice
ruffian really, and that they should leave him alone. While Martin was distracting the attention of his friends in this way, Frans managed to get to his feet and ran off.
Instead, Martin received the thrashing that had been intended for Frans. Besides that, for a long time afterwards, he had to suffer the derision of his classmates for being friends with a ruffian. And when he next met Frans in the street, outside the dyer’s door, Frans immediately tripped Martin up so that he fell in the gutter, made his nose bleed, tore his books to shreds, swore dreadfully and ran off.
For he had failed to realize that he was meant to be a noble redskin. But then nor was Frans just a little ruffian like so many others; he was an absolutely terrible ruffian.
XI
Martin started at the big school.
Everything there was so cold and unfamiliar. Grey walls, long corridors.
And the playground was like the Sahara Desert. When the bell rang for the first break, Martin stole away to the privy to avoid his new classmates. But during the next break they gathered round him in a circle and contemplated him in silence for a while, until finally a little red-haired boy with a broad head opened his mouth to ask:
“Who the hell are you?”
When he heard these words, Martin sensed darkly that a new phase in his life was now beginning. He had been as happy as a pea in a pod, like any small child with good parents and a good home. But now the doors to a whole new world were being thrown wide open, a world where he could no longer get by using the same simple means of survival that his mother and father had taught him: to be polite and kind to everybody and never to tread on other people’s toes. What mattered here was being able to judge quickly and safely when to use your fists and when to take to your heels, and under what circumstances you could benefit from a little cunning and deceit. But it was not too long before Martin found his feet. He suddenly remembered various oaths and bad words he had heard the bridgemaster’s lad out in the country using, and he never missed an opportunity to slip them into his conversations with classmates where he thought it appropriate. In this way he got to know them more rapidly, and in return they enlightened him on many things that
it might be useful for a newcomer to know: which of the teachers gave beatings and which simply gave black marks; that the worst of the lot was Dominie Sundell, who had mirrors in his glasses so that he could see everything that was going on behind his back, and who always went about in galoshes made of gutta-percha so that you wouldn’t hear him coming in the corridor; that Sausagey was nice, though he was stingy over marks, but that the Flea was a miserable old so-and-so.
XII
So the years piled up, and new things were allowed to bury the old ones, while Martin slowly became practised in life’s double art of learning and forgetting. For just as a gambler must, if he is to manage to hold out until the very last coin has slipped from his trembling hand, be able to forget his losses for the sake of the winnings he is playing for, so also for Man, the involuntary gambler, the art of forgetting is the most important and the one on which the whole thing depends.
And Martin forgot. The Red Turk, who had long since grown tired of jumping about, might as well never have existed. And Uncle Abraham, who had given it to him and had hanged himself with a damper-cord one rainy day when he no longer thought it worth the trouble of living, was soon forgotten too, even though he would occasionally pop up in Martin’s dreams as a dark, unsettling enigma. But as Martin forgot, he learned. A third of the truth he got from his teachers, and another third from his friends, who soon helped him lift the veil under which the Seventh Commandment and everything associated with it lay shrouded. They explained precisely what it was that Absalom had done with his father’s concubines on the palace roof in the sight of all Israel, and they revelled with Ezekiel in the unfathomable sins of Aholah and Aholibah. But even though these two thirds were presented to him diluted with delusions and falsehoods - and though the remaining third of the truth, which was perhaps the most important, and which it was up to him to seek for himself one day, had not yet started to preoccupy him - the holes tom by experience in the cobweb-like
hedges of stories and dreams that kindly hands had erected round the garden of his childhood still grew wider by the day; and increasingly often, through these splits, there gaped the big, empty hole known as the world.
The White Cap
I
When Martin Birck had gained his white cap*, his first concern was to go into a tobacconist’s to buy a bamboo cane and a packet of cigarettes. The young girl serving in the shop had black eyes and a duck fringe. Her outward appearance only partially resembled the ideal of his dreams, which lay in a fairer, more Gretchen-like sphere; but when she congratulated him in friendly fashion on his white cap, at the same time giving him a look full of kindness, even though he had never set foot in her shop before, his heart felt suddenly very warm, and he grasped her dirty hand, which lay outstretched over the stock of ‘Cameo’ and ‘Duke of Durham’ on the counter, and kissed it tenderly. He regretted it almost immediately, however. He had perhaps behaved badly. Admittedly he didn’t imagine that the young girl was entirely innocent - she probably had a lover, perhaps several - but that didn’t mean that any Tom, Dick or Harry had the right to come in off the street and kiss her hand just like that. He stood there embarrassed, not knowing what to say or do, until he finally brought himself to choose a cane, light a cigarette, pay and leave.
Drottninggatan was still glistening wet after the last shower of rain. Little ladies, their tournures bobbing up and down, lifted their skirts to jump over the puddles of water, which mirrored the blue of the sky. Elegant gentlemen with narrow, checked trouser-legs and bamboo canes the same as Martin’s
swung their top hats in solemn greeting, baring heads so closely shaved that the scalp shone through. The restless white clouds of a spring day hurried over the chimneys and roofs of the grey buildings in fluttering haste, and away down at the bottom of the street, the sunlight quivered round churches and towers. Martin stopped in front of every other shop window to admire the reflection of his white cap. He was unable to grasp the fact that he had now left school. Right up until the last moment, he had thought he was going to fail. His surprise was all the more pleasant when he got his leaving certificate along with the others, especially when he came to the last few lines: “For these reasons, and having regard to the degree of maturity that a complete elementary education is intended to provide, the aforementioned M. Birck has been found worthy of the commendation ‘passed with distinction’.” These words made his heart swell with emotional gratitude towards the teaching staff; admittedly he regarded himself as fairly mature, but to find that this view was shared by his teachers was much more than he expected. In the last few terms he had seldom done his homework. Often he had not even been able to bring himself to read it through during the ten-minute break before the start of the lesson, or to slip a couple of pages torn out of the textbook into his Bible to study during assembly while the divinity master stood at the lectern talking rubbish, a ploy that otherwise not even the laziest of his friends would miss the opportunity to fall back on. Yet he would have liked very much to please his parents with good end-of-term reports, even though he personally had no desire for honour in that direction. But in the last few years a hollow apathy towards anything to do with school had come over him, against which he could do nothing. He found it so hard to take it really seriously. If he had ever, contrary to habit, done well in one subject or another, he was almost ashamed of himself, as if he had uttered a platitude.
Whenever he was supposed to immerse himself in the scanty details in which the textbooks delighted, he felt nearly as ridiculous as the man who rescued the toasting fork when his house burned down.
Now that the toasting fork really had been rescued, though, he could have sung for joy, and feeling happy and free, he hurried homewards with his white cap, home to the blossoming street of his childhood. But the street was no longer the same. From one single little patch of garden, the cherry tree still extended its branches over a mossy paling - the rest was big red-brick houses and miserable little Nonconformist chapels. And Frans the ruffian was no longer able to disturb what little idyll remained, since he too had grown up and had been in Långholmen jail for a long time now.
II
The house was quieter and emptier than it used to be. Maria, Martin’s sister, had been married for a year to a doctor in a distant part of the country, and Grandmama was no more.
That evening Martin and his friends were having a schoolleaving celebration at Hasselbacken. Martin’s father gave him five crowns to sacrifice to the joys of youth, and his mother took him aside and said:
“Martin, Martin, now you must promise me that you’ll be careful tonight and won’t let yourself be fooled into doing anything silly. You mustn’t worry about emptying your glass every time someone wants to drink a toast with you, otherwise you’ll get completely light-headed. Best of all would be if you just pretended to drink. And I must warn you, Martin, that there are certain dreadful women whose sole concern is with trying to drive young men to rack and ruin. You must be particularly wary of them. Martin dear, if only I knew that you kept faith in God and thought of him, I shouldn’t be worried about you, but I know of course that you don’t. Their very breath is poisonous, and even if you only stop in the street to talk to one of these women, you can catch the most awful diseases, which no doctor on earth can cure.”
“Mama dear,” replied Martin, “you’ve got hold of completely the wrong end of the stick. ”
He picked up his white cap, said farewell and left.
His mother followed him with troubled eyes, and when he had gone she sat down in a dark corner and cried. For she sensed that she was going to lose him, as mothers always do lose their sons.
in
Martin was thinking about his mother as he walked down Storgatan on his way to Djurgården.
How had the relationship between them turned out the way it had? To her, he was still a small child. When he first started talking to her about his religious doubts, she pretended to believe that it was something he had picked up somewhere, from nasty friends or some wicked book. Then it had got to the point where he was no longer able to talk to her about anything other than the most mundane subjects: shirts and socks and buttons that needed sewing on. If their conversation ever turned to a more serious topic, they each treated the other like a small child. And without his wanting it or noticing it before it was too late, his tone on these occasions could acquire a somewhat supercilious edge, so that after such a conversation both of them were left with a thorn in their heart.
She would often lie awake at night, crying and worrying about his lack of faith. Yet she herself was very down to earth in all her thoughts and hopes and in her entire being. She believed in hell of course, for she believed in the Bible, but she could never seriously imagine that her son, or indeed anyone she knew or came into contact with, would end up in such a dreadful place. So it was not actually his soul that she was most concerned about, but his future here on earth; for she had noticed that people who hated God and religion tended not to get on very well in the world. Some ended up in prison, others left the country to live among foreigners, all of them aroused the hostility and suspicion of respectable folk. She was afraid her
son could end up as one of those people, and that was what kept her awake at night and made her eyes red with weeping. She wished for nothing more dearly than that he should become like others, the way most people are, if possible better and above all happier, but on the whole like them. She could well imagine that her son might become a poet, and she might even wish it, since she loved poetry, and tears would come into her eyes when he read her one of his poems. But then she thought to herself that he ought to work in a government office on weekdays and just write on Sundays and in his spare time, penning a few verses about sunsets which he would send to the Swedish Academy and win a prize for, so becoming at one and the same time a great poet and a respected official with a guaranteed income. She believed in all seriousness that he would also win more respect among poets if he had a position in a government department and a title, than if he was merely a writer. After all, that had been the case with all the real poets. Tegnér was really a bishop, and even Bellman had had a job with the lottery. As a particular example that Martin should follow, she used to mention a poet she had known when she was young, who was now an assessor at the Administrative Court of Appeal and wrote poetry about everything great and beautiful, about the sea and the sun and the King, and who had the Vasa Medal. She considered such a life to be noble and worth striving for, and this was the sort of thing she envisaged when her dreams about her son’s future reached their peak.
But Martin dreamt other dreams. He wanted to be a poet. He would write a book, a novel or a cycle of poems, or best of all an ideological drama in the same metre as Brand or Peer Gynt. He would devote his life to searching for the truth and giving people as much of it as he found or believed he had found. And he would become a great and famous man and would earn a lot of money, he would buy his father a little house and his mother
a new silk dress, because the old one was threadbare and had been turned inside out and worn too often. He would be envied by men and desired by women, but of all the women in the world he would love only one, and this one would be in love with another man. This unhappy love would lend bitterness and depth to his thoughts and wings to his poetry. But he had an obscure feeling that, while he was seeking the truth, he would find only truths, and while he would give these to people in a poetry more wonderful than any music or in a clear, cold prose with words like sharp teeth, he would despise himself for reaping glory and riches from the crumbs that he had found by chance while looking for something else. And this hatred of himself would gnaw at his soul and turn him into an empty shell. But he would not let the outside world see anything of this, he would paint his cheeks with rouge and his eyes with Indian ink and carry his head high, and at the very moment that he himself hated his work most deeply and considered it lower than the lowliest trade, people would be most enthralled by it, and he would be elected to the Swedish Academy to succeed Wirsén. With a face as immovable as a mask he would make the customary flowery speech about his predecessor. Then never again would he set pen to paper. He would seek to drown his despair in a curiously colourful and confused way of life. No vice would be alien to him, he would drive through the streets in a cab in broad daylight, in the company of clowns and harlots, and he would pass his nights gambling and drinking. Until, one gloomy evening in October, he would tire of his crazed, empty life, make up the fire in his stove, bum all his papers, drain a glass of dark-red wine laced with a mysterious powder and fall asleep, never to wake again...
Or perhaps it was not necessary for his life to end so tragically. When he thought about it more closely, it even struck him as a bit banal. He could just as easily move to some small
town, to Strängnäs or Gränna, where he could rent a house and live alone with a parrot and a black cat. He could also have an aquarium with goldfish. Behind closed shutters he would dream away his days, but when night fell he would light candles in every room and pace up and down, up and down, brooding over the vanity of everything. And when the townsfolk went past his house on their way home from their evening toddy in the townhall tavern, they would stop and point up at his windows and say:
“That is where Martin Birck lives. He has learnt like a wise man and lived like a fool, and he is deeply unhappy."
This, and much else besides, is what Martin Birck was thinking as he walked down Storgatan and across Djurgården on his way to Hasselbacken.
IV
The orchestra intoned the opening bars of Boito’s Mefistofele.
Martin was sitting outside, on the parapet of the balcony, with Henrik Rissler. They were listening to the music, looking out over the terraces and not saying much. Henrik Rissler had a smooth, white forehead and calm, clear eyes. His gaze was searching and far-reaching and seemed to skim over the nearest objects to reach the more distant ones faster. He was the only classmate to seek Martin’s company outside school. They were in the habit of going home with each other in the afternoons to talk and smoke cigarettes, and sometimes they would go for long walks together, to Djurgården or Ladugårdsgärdet, often in the rain or the snow or the wind, and would talk about all the things that preoccupy young people, about girls and God and the immortality of the soul. Or they would walk the streets by gaslight with the feeling that they were throwing themselves into the rough-and-tumble of the world, stopping in front of the copper etchings in the bookshop windows, and most of all they admired a lithograph with the title Don Juan aux Enfers and a motto from Baudelaire:
Mais le calme héros, courbé sur sa rapiére, regardait le sillage et ne daignait rien voir.*
This picture set their imagination going, their hearts would then beat faster when they brushed against a pretty girl’s arm in the crowds, and they would imagine they had lived through a whole adventure every time a painted old hag threw them a warm glance.
But the principal reason for their friendship was that they had both read Niels Lyhne* and liked it better than other books.
Inside, everyone was talking and laughing over their punch bowls and forming groups and cliques. Most of them formed groups according to old habit and social and intellectual similarities and differences, which even on the school benches had united some and set them apart from others: Gabel and Billfelt, Jansson and Moberg, Planius and Tullman. Others were going about somewhat sullenly, talking about solidarity.
Josef Marin banged on his bowl and proposed a toast to ‘the ontological proof’, which was drunk with rather feeble agreement. They were all so fed up with anything to do with school that they didn’t even consider it worth joking about.
Josef Marin was going to become a priest, but he was not yet quite certain of his faith.
The band played the student songs ‘Stand Fast’ and ‘Happy Student Days’. It was starting to get dark over the treetops, over the chimneys and roofs of the town and the hills to the south: the pale dusk of a spring evening, diluting everything and lifting everything and making it floating and unreal like the land of dreams. The crowd drinking toasts down below on the terrace, the component parts of which could still be clearly discerned a few minutes previously - lieutenants and students, guardsmen and girls, and the bourgeoisie with wives and children - had now, in the twilight, fused together into a disorganized mass and, as if possessed by some inexplicable whim, the murmur
suddenly fell silent, so that the splash of the water in the fountain and the last sleepy chirps of the birds in the trees could be heard for a second. In the west a bright, solitary star was already blazing.
“Look at Venus,” said Henrik, “how she twinkles!”
Martin was sitting deep in thought, drawing on the table, and beneath his hand the strokes formed themselves into the breast and arms of a woman.
“Tell me,” he asked suddenly - he felt himself blushing -“tell me, do you think it’s possible for a man to live in celibacy until the right love affair turns up? That’s really what you should aim to do. To be together with women for whom you have no feelings, who belong to another world and have dirty linen and use foul language and only think about payment, that must be horrible.”
Henrik Rissler also went a bit red.
“Possibly,” he said, “yes, for some it is always possible. People are so different. But this much I know about myself already: that it is hardly likely to prove possible for me. At least, not if I have to wait much longer for the love of my life... ”
They sat in silence gazing at the star, which was burning ever more brightly in the deepening blue.
“Venus,” mumbled Martin, “Venus. A large, beautiful star. But I don’t understand why she should have a name. At any rate, she doesn’t come if you call her. ”
Martin suddenly heard a strange voice behind his chair.
“Quite true,” said the voice, “quite true. She doesn’t come if you call her. A remark that’s as melancholy as it is pertinent!”
Martin turned round in surprise. The stranger was a scruffily dressed man in a student’s cap, with a thin, pale face and a black moustache that hung down over his mouth so that it was not easy to see whether he was smiling or serious. The face looked a little old for the white cap, which was not quite clean either.
One of Martin’s classmates was standing alongside and introduced him as Dr Markel.
Dr Markel had come there in the company of one of Billfelt’s elder brothers. They had arrived from Uppsala that day and had lunch at Hasselbacken, after which they had invited themselves to take part in the school-leaving celebrations. Billfelt the elder was just making a speech inside. Martin could hear something about ‘Uppsala’ and ‘alma mater’.
Without further ado, Dr Markel sat down with Henrik and Martin.
“Two young poets, am I right?” he asked. “I venture to presume so because you gentlemen are sitting here by yourselves, apart from the profane herd, and talking about the stars. Dare I ask what the gentlemen’s philosophy of life is? Do you believe in God?”
Henrik Rissler looked at the stranger in astonishment, and Martin shook his head.
Dr Markel looked completely serious; there was just a light mist over his eyes, which were big and sad.
Some of the others had joined them and were listening to the conversation. Blanins and Tullman put on the same learned faces as they would use during lessons to listen to the teacher’s explanations. Gabel smiled sarcastically with his handsome, noble countenance, and behind him Josef Marin pushed his way forward. Josef Marin was small and weakly built, and he looked pale and worn. The two or three glasses of punch he had drunk had already made him a bit merry; but now that he heard a serious question being asked and was unable to see the underlying joke, he joined in with all the seriousness he could muster in his haste:
“1 believe in God. But 1 don’t imagine him as being like a person. ”
Dr Markel appeared pleasantly surprised.
“Oh, so you’re a pantheist, how delightful! You too should become one,” - he turned to Martin - “you who are studying to be a poet. To poets, and to those who want to seduce pretty girls, which all poets want to, I cannot recommend the pantheistic view of the world warmly enough. There can be nothing better suited to turn a young girl’s head than the pantheistic drivel with which Faust answers Gretchen’s simple question, ‘Do you believe in God?’ If he had then answered, as simply and innocently as she had asked, ‘No, my child, I don’t believe in God’, then you can be certain that the girl would have crossed herself and run indoors, ins Stille Kämmerlein, turning the key twice in the lock. Instead he replies that he both believes and does not believe, which gives the impression of deep internal conflicts, and that God is really the name of the feeling that two lovers experience when they lie in the same bed. He says all this with much pathos and in a beautiful language, so that it doesn’t offend her modesty; on the contrary, she thinks he is talking like a priest, and we know the rest. - And for a poet... But first, allow me as an older student...”
With the ease of a man of the world, Dr Markel proposed first-name terms to everyone that happened to be within reach for a toast of brotherhood, then went on:
“For a poet, pantheism is a real find, a true goldmine. If he is religious in a churchgoing sense, he is sure to get the Order of Charles XIII and a good income, but will be read only by old maids and mocked in the liberal newspapers, which apart from anything else enjoy the largest readership. If he is an atheist, he will be regarded as a shallow, superficial character and a wicked person, and will find it hard to borrow money. No, a poet should believe in God, but in a god that is something quite extraordinary and noch nie Dagewesenes, never before seen in any circus, and that people can never really get to know, for then the joke would be over straight away. The god of
pantheism is exactly the raw material needed for such a god. It is the ideal god. Each and every man can cut him to his own shape, he never takes offence, he never punishes and admittedly never rewards anyone either, he takes everything calmly, and this is because he lacks one small characteristic that even the simplest ruffian down at the docks possesses to a certain degree: personality. You have to have a personal relationship with a personal god - in other words, you have to be a pietist. It is an excellent thing to be a pietist if you have just come out of Långholmen jail and need to be rehabilitated. Otherwise it is unnecessary. You see where I am leading, gentlemen: to have a personal god brings with it a load of unnecessary difficulties; to be completely without one is too risky. Therefore you have to have an impersonal god. Such a god fires the imagination and comes across well in poetry, without bringing any obligations in return. With such a god, you will be seen by all educated people as an enlightened and noble-minded individual and will be able to become whatever you like, from archbishop to editor of a radical newspaper.
“In formal language, he is called Heavenly Father; in everyday terms, Our Lord. Really he doesn’t need a name, because the same is true of him as of that star up there: at any rate, he doesn’t come if you call him.”
The gesture with which Dr Markel looked for the star and beckoned her towards him, so to speak, found only a dark, overcast void. Great clouds had gathered, the star was gone, it had become as gloomy as an autumn evening, and a few large raindrops were already starting to fall on the balustrade.
Dr Markel’s behaviour had not met with approval. Josef Marin, who had drunk even more punch and turned even paler while Markel was speaking, muttered something to the effect that somebody ought to clout him on the jaw. Others stood about in groups, discussing whether to break up.
Billfelt the elder sensed the mood, rang for the waiter and ordered champagne. He raised his glass and, in beautifully rounded turns of phrase, thanked the company for the kindness with which he and his friend Dr Markel, representatives of Uppsala and alma mater, had been received by the prospective alumni, after which he paid for the champagne and disappeared with Markel.
“Your brother is a gentleman,” said Gabel to Billfelt.
It was raining as though the heavens had burst. They crowded aboard a tram to travel into town to have coffee. The majority favoured the Hamburger Börs.
Martin, who had always thought the Hamburger Börs was a place where the German merchants of Stockholm gathered to do business, entered to his amazement a restaurant that seemed to exude fabulous luxury. Here and there on the settees sat some of his former teachers and a few old friends of his father, who raised their glasses and nodded genially.
Coffee and liqueurs arrived. They spoke about their plans for the future. Most of them were going to become lawyers and planned to spend the summer studying for their preliminary examinations. Spirits rose, and they made careless promises to stick together and not to forget one another. At one end of the table, Gabel and Billfelt swore eternal friendship; at the other, Jansson expressed his feelings for Moberg. Only with effort was Josef Marin able to refrain from making prophecies. When Josef Marin made prophecies, what happened was that he would recite long strings of trivial doggerel, marriage announcements from Dagens Nyheter mixed with chunks of Tegnér’s Svea* and Norbeck’s theology textbook; and he did all this in the same
solemn chant with which he imagined Elijah punished Ahab and Ezekiel foretold the destruction of Israel and Judah. It had turned one o’clock and was approaching two, and one or two of them were already saying goodnight and departing, particularly those who intended in all seriousness to study for their preliminary examinations. The public was dispersing round about them, the electric light had long since been extinguished, only a couple of gas flames were still burning, and the waiters were standing with faces like martyrs, longing for sleep and tips. There was nothing for it but to break up.
Outside, it was already starting to get light in the streets and squares. It was no longer raining, but the air felt damp and cold and misty, and the clock of St James’s was shining through the fog like a moon out of FUegende Blatter*.
They were finding it difficult to part and drifted a little way down the promenade past the Opera House. Poets and newspaper hacks were emerging from the garden of the Opera Café, and Martin watched them with reverence and wondered whether he would ever be lucky enough to be like them. The students’ caps shone white in the darkness, and ladies of the night came fluttering like butterflies from left and right, slipped their arms under those of the young men and tempted them with promises of life’s supreme joy. And with much merriment and innocent jesting, they went down to Charles XII Square together, because Josef Marin had taken it into his head to prophesy in front of Charles XU. But while he was prophesying, Gabel grabbed the prettiest girl round the waist and began to waltz with her round the statue, Moberg followed his example and danced with an elderly bacchante, and Martin stood with pounding heart, gazing at a pale, unhappy little body with eyes as black as coal, and wondering whether he dare approach her;
but while he was wondering, Planius put his arm round her waist and scampered off, and Martin stood alone, watching them spinning round in the mist, two by two. But the morning breeze was already starting to lift the mists over Södermalm, which drifted over the water like white smoke, and the cross on the dome of St Catherine’s shone like the morning star in the first ray of dawn.
A policeman appeared down on the quayside and approached slowly, one of the girls let out a little cry of warning, and the host was scattered in all directions. A fat nymph took Martin’s arm without further ado and accompanied him.
“I must hold on to your arm, sweetie pie, otherwise that copper will come and nick me. Anyway, you’re welcome to come home with me, how about it? My place is really nice, you’ll see. I’ve got a nice big bed and I embroidered the sheets myself. I usually spend the mornings doing embroidery, because you’ve got to have something to do, and I couldn’t stand just sitting there playing manage with Madam day in and day out like the other girls do, and then they swear and live it up and act vulgar too. I don’t like that kind of thing, I like nice respectable lads like you best. And if you’re really nice and come and see me often, I’ll embroider you a nightshirt as a memento. - So you ain't got no money then, hang it, that’s another kettle of fish. Come back again when you’ve got some. Just ask for Hulda. But tell me, is it true that there’s a girl in Uppsala that they call Charles XII?”
“I don’t know,” replied Martin.
“Well, cheerie-bye then...”
It was not quite true that Martin had no money; he still had a few crowns left over from the honorarium for a poem he had had published in the People’s Friend, and he had simply said so in order not to hurt her feelings.
V
Martin lay awake for a long time, unable to sleep. It was the little dark pale one that would not let him rest. She had stood there so pale and quiet and lonely, she had not taken anyone by the arm and had not laughed and chatted like the others. Who was she, and how had she ended up where she was? She had probably been seduced and abandoned; perhaps she had a little child that would starve and freeze if she did not feed and clothe it by selling her body. How he would kiss her if he had her in his anus now, how he would caress her and call her the tenderest names and try to make her forget who she was, a common prostitute, and who he was, a chance, paying customer like all the others! Who was she with now - with Planius perhaps? What could Planius be to her? He was no more handsome than Martin and was as thick as two short planks. He had been one of the worst swots, yet had only got ‘satisfactory’ on his leaving certificate. Why should she choose him of all people? But she had not of course had any choice; it was simply a case of first come, first served. Martin understood this and thought it only natural. She had once upon a time given away her heart and soul, and had nothing left to give apart from her body, and why should she deny that to anyone, now that it was her job to sell it and she had sunk as deep into the dirt as a person can sink? Yet perhaps, if Martin could meet her and she got to know him, perhaps she might still grow fond of him and be able to start a new life. He would sacrifice everything for her, he would sacrifice all his dreams of fame as a poet and his whole future for her, he would choose a job in which he could
immediately earn enough to keep both of them, they would get married and live far away from civilization in a little house beside a lake deep in the woods. They would lie together dreaming away the hours in a little boat among the reeds, they would go ashore on a rocky islet and stay there together all night, while the stars blazed overhead. He would banish all sorrow and dark memories from her brow with a kiss, and love her little child as if it were his own--
But while Martin was daydreaming in this way, at the same time he was fully aware that beneath all these fantasies lay nothing more than desire, a young man’s hunger for the white body of a woman. And the longer the night drew on, as he lay awake staring at the grey light of morning seeping in from behind the blind, the more bitterly he regretted having refused the other one, the fat one.
VI
When anyone asks a young man who has just passed his schoolleaving examination what he is going to become, he should not reply ‘a poet’, or people will turn their heads away and conceal their laughter. He can reply ‘a lawyer’ or ‘a painter’ or ‘a musician’, because you can be trained for all those occupations at public institutions, and even while you are studying you already have a little ledge in society to sit on, a compartment to place yourself in, and you already are something: a student at the University or the Academy of Fine Arts or the Conservatory. It is not much, but it is always a little sugarlump to throw into the jaws of those who press you, and the sort of future those who mean well can comprehend. But the man who wants to become a poet is nothing more than a laughing-stock for God and for his fellow men, until he achieves recognition and fame. He must therefore, throughout the long years of his apprenticeship, hang a false sign over his door and pretend to occupy himself with something that people regard as respectable.
Martin realized this and thought it was completely natural and could not be otherwise, and when his father asked him what he was going to become, he did not reply that he was going to be a poet, but that he wanted to apply to join a government office as a supernumerary. This answer pleased his father, who saw in it an indication that his son was going to be as sensible and contented as himself. He had feared that Martin might want to go to Uppsala to study aesthetics, and he felt within himself that he would have been unable to refuse; but he trembled at the
thought of all the expense and worry that having a son at university means for a poor man with a family. He was therefore delighted by the answer he now received, and had nothing to say other than that Martin should not apply just to one department, but to as many as possible; and that evening he invited Martin to accompany him to Blanch’s Café to listen to the music and drink toddy.
But the very next day he went into action, speaking to his acquaintances in various departments and helping Martin to write applications.
VII*
However, Martin had to pay his respects in person, wearing tails and a white cravat, at eight o’clock in the morning at the home of the head of the department in which he principally aimed to work. Frozen and hungry, since he had not managed to eat anything, he ascended the staircase of a quiet house in a posh street and rang the Director General’s doorbell. A servant with gold braid announced his arrival and opened the door of a dimly lit boudoir, whose curtains were only half open. All sorts of articles of clothing lay strewn everywhere on the chairs, a large green medal ribbon was hanging on the dressing-table mirror, and in the doorway stood a chamberpot, which he nearly tripped over, but he stopped himself in time and came to a standstill with a dumb bow. In the middle of the room stood an imposing old gentleman in a purple-red velvet dressing gown, gesticulating with a shaving knife and with his chin covered in soap, and a voice arose from amid the red velvet and the white soap and said:
“You have a good school-leaving certificate, sir, but do not forget that honesty and diligence are what matter in the service of the State. You are accepted, sir, and can present yourself tomorrow to begin your service, if there is anything to be done. Above all, be honest! Goodbye.”
Martin assumed that this impolite address was in keeping
with old tradition and did not let himself be put off by it. He arrived at the office and was given a seat at a table and a thick ledger to scrutinize. He calculated column after column. If the totals were correct, he was to place a tick in the margin; if they were not correct, he was to make a note. But they always were correct. Martin gradually became convinced that no mistake ever occurred in these calculations, and once this conviction had become firmly rooted in his mind, he gave up calculating altogether and merely placed ticks. Now and again he would look up from his real or pretended work and listen to the flies buzzing and the rain splashing against the windowsill, or to the conversations and arguments of his older colleagues, or to a blind man playing the flute down in the yard.
And he said to himself:
“So this is life.”
VIII
But for Martin this was not life. For him it was a hiding-place, an asylum, in which he had sought refuge for a time that he hoped to be able to keep short.
He read and he thought. In books and in his own thoughts he looked for that which young people so often seek, only to forget in their old age that they have ever worried about it: a belief to live for, a star to steer by, a coherence to things, a meaning and an aim.
Martin had been a Christian until the age of fifteen. It is natural for a child to believe what older people say is true. He had believed everything and harboured no doubts, and on Sundays he had gone to church with his parents. If the priest was an orator and a charlatan, he would feel edified and moved and would wish that he could become such a priest himself; but if the priest was an unassuming, honest man who preached to the best of his ability, without a lot of noise and gesticulation, then Martin would usually fall asleep. But when he was approaching sixteen, he went to confirmation classes. Religion had hitherto been a minor detail at school, pushed to one side along with other minor details; now it suddenly became all-important, something that occupied his time and his thoughts every day. And it was not content with thoughts: it also set its sights on the emotions - for it was customary for people to cry when they were confirmed - and it openly advanced its claim to be the most important thing of all, the leading force in life, the only thing
that mattered. Martin was unable to escape the conclusion that, if religion was the truth, then it was right about this too, and about this above all else; and so he would have to devote all his strength and all his soul to it, he would have to become a pietist. But if it was not the truth, then he would have to seek the truth wherever he could find it and become a freethinker. The position in between, Christianity out of custom and habit, as confessed and believed in by the masses, was to him an unthinking platitude. It was a way out that seemed natural to him for most of his friends, but he never even imagined that it might be open to him. He was at a crossroads and had to choose.
One night as he lay awake brooding over all this, unable to sleep, while the moon shone straight into the room and the thoughts jostled for position inside his head, it suddenly became clear to him that he did not believe. It occurred to him, as though he had realized it long ago, that the Christian religion was really something that no-one could believe in if he was to be honest with himself. It became evident to him that he had already got beyond the problem of the truth of Christianity, and that it was really an entirely different riddle that was now troubling him: How was it possible for others to believe in it and not for him? By ‘others’ he did not just mean his friends, since they seemed not to give such matters a second thought, and he knew anyway that they could be made to believe a little of everything, but his parents, his teachers, all those adults who surely knew more about life and the world than he did. How was it possible that he, Martin Birck, who was still not quite sixteen and was lying in a little iron bed in his parents’ home, could think differently from older, more experienced people about supreme matters of the utmost importance, and that he could be right and they could be wrong? This seemed to him to be an insanity almost as mind-boggling as the very faith he had just rejected. At this point, everything ground to a standstill for
him and he was unable to shed any light on it. He got out of bed and walked over to the window. The snow was gleaming white on the roof, the houses were in darkness, and the street was deserted. The moon was high in the sky, but it was a greyish-white winter moon, small and frostbitten and infinitely remote, and the stars twinkled sleepily and faintly through the moonlit haze. Martin stood drawing on the windowpane with his finger. “Give me a sign, God!” he whispered. He stood at the window for a long time, freezing and staring at the moon; he watched it slide behind a black factory chimney and hide itself there, and he watched it creep out again on the other side. But he received no sign.
Nor, in the depths of his heart, did he wish for one, for he sensed that faith was not something that anyone could or should be given on a plate by means of a miracle. To search for the truth and to be true to himself in his search: that was the only clue he could find.
Martin thought that confirmation and first communion were duties prescribed by law that could not be evaded. His father did not know any differently, or if he did then he did not say so, since he lived by the motto ‘talking is silver, silence is golden’. And so Martin went to communion with the other confirmation candidates. It was a spring day with sunshine and tender foliage on the old trees of the churchyard, and when Martin heard the bells booming and singing, and the organ struck up the entrance hymn, his eyes filled with tears and he grieved in his heart over the fact that he was not like the others and was unable to believe and feel as they did. And when he saw the church full of solemn people and heard the teacher’s voice from the pulpit exhorting the young people to stick resolutely to the faith of their fathers, he felt unease and confusion in the depths of his soul, and again the riddle was there to unsettle him: How is it possible for all these people to believe, and not for me? It is madness to think
that I alone can be right, against all these people and all the dead people resting in graves outside, who lived and died in the faith that I am rejecting. It is madness, madness! I must overcome my reason and teach myself to believe. But when it came to the actual ceremony and he saw the priests in their robes bobbing up and down in front of the altar as they saw to the bread and the wine, with cloths over their arms like waiters, he felt giddy and sickened and was unable to understand why he had let himself be taken in by all this. Although he knew or believed that the priests padding about up there in the gloom were more or less as honourable in everyday life as most other people, at this moment they struck him as shameless frauds.
Belief in a God and in a life after this one were what Martin had left of his childhood faith at this stage. But his god was no longer a fatherly god who listened to prayers and nodded his approval of them if they were useful and sensible or shook his head if they were childish and silly. His god had become as ice-cold and remote as the moon he had stood staring at one winter night, and he stopped saying his prayers at night, since he did not believe anyone heard them. Finally the day came when Martin realized that what he had latterly been calling ‘god’ was not something with which a human being could enter into any sort of relationship, either of love and obedience or of the opposite, and could not be called ‘god’ except by a frivolous play on words and by abusing the imperfections of language. And when he examined his belief in immortality, he soon found that he had come a long way from the blue kingdom of heaven of his childhood. He had noticed that anyone who advocated a belief in an afterlife on the basis of anything other than a revelation also presupposed a life before this one, which he found natural and logical. Only tilings that have always existed are eternal. Things that once upon a time came into being will one day cease to be: that was the law for everything in
existence. But Martin had no recollection of any previous existence, nor had he read or heard of anyone who claimed to remember one with any semblance of plausibility. Admittedly there were people who claimed to remember their previous existence; but then, as a rule, they claimed to have been some historical figure they had read about in books during their present existence: Julius Caesar, or Pope Gregory VII. Only seldom could anyone remember having been a slave or a waiter or a shop assistant. This fact appeared strange. In any event it was clear that the majority of people, Martin included, had not the slightest recollection of any previous existence. From this he concluded that in a life to come he would not be able to remember anything of his present one either; indeed, that he would not even be able to prove his identity. He considered that to call such a continuing existence ‘immortality’ was, as with the question of God a moment ago, nothing more than a weak link in one’s chain of thought and a play on the imperfection of language. It seemed to him even more bizarre to give such a name to the absorption of the dead body by living nature, by plants and animals and air and water. He was not one for such games with words.
In this way it came about that Martin set out in life with no belief other than that he would grow up and grow old and die, like a tree in the ground and his father before him, and that the green earth he saw with his own eyes was his only home in all the worlds and the only space he had been given to live and work in. Among the many dreams he invented about his life there was one about becoming a large, beautiful tree by the roadside, luxuriantly green, and giving cover and shade to many people. He wanted to create happiness and beauty all around him and to banish delusions, and he would speak and write in such a way that everyone would immediately see he was right. Admittedly he was not entirely certain that the truth in itself
could create happiness, but history had taught him that delusion gave rise to misfortune and misdeed. The various religions had spread like epidemics over the world, and he was astounded to think of all the devastation that had characterized the path of Christianity through the ages and the peoples. But he believed with full confidence that its days were now numbered. He thought he could sense that he was living in the dawn of a new age, and he wanted, through thoughts and poetry, to play his part in paving the way for what was to come.
At the time when Martin believed and thought like this, it still seemed to him that life, however short and risky it might be, had some sort of meaning. He felt himself to be in the midst of development and growth, and new truths dawned on his mind and new beauty on his senses every day during his long, lonely walks to the outskirts of town or in the woods when spring started to arrive. And the spring... In those days the spring was still a real spring - not an illness, an intoxication, a fever in the blood, in which all the old, half-forgotten losses and longings float to the surface and say: Here I am, look, do you recognize me? I have slept for a long time, but I am not dead! Nothing like this, but an awakening, a morning, a murmur in the air and a ringing song. In those days the thousands of unfulfilled desires he carried within himself were like many shimmering hopes and half-made promises, for long years of emptiness and disappointment had not yet ground them into sharp knives that pierced and tore at the soul. Even if he did not seriously believe that all these obligations, or even most of them, would be met by life, they were still there as seductive possibilities, as a lever to open up dreams without aim or bounds, and even at moments when the book he was holding in his hand or the experiences he had had in the course of the day whispered warnings in his ear, advising him not to believe in good fortune, they would flood together in a longing without bitterness and a melancholy as
light as the spring dusk.
Yet these warnings became more and more frequent; and increasingly often, in the course of the dreams that his young blood deceitfully conjured up before him, he would catch himself listening to the other voice, the voice that forced its way up from the depths of ancient times and echoed through the most recent books of the day, the strange voice that none of the hundreds of new gospels which, like spring storms, had periodically blown through the minds of mankind had managed to silence for more than a brief moment, the voice that said: All is vanity, and there is nothing new under the sun. Why was he alive, and what was the purpose of the whole thing? He did not stop posing himself these questions, since he still demanded of the life he saw with his own eyes that there should be something beneath it, something that could be called the meaning of life. For most of the happiness he saw people possessing or striving for seemed really to be withered leaves, like the enchanted gold in the fairytale, or else an amusing toy, something people were unable to take seriously. And when he turned his gaze towards his own life, as he lived it from day to day, he could not escape the conclusion that in itself it was wretched and empty, and that its only worth lay in the vague hope that it need not always remain so. But what he hoped for was not to achieve something that could be approached step by step, through hard work and patience and hundreds of small sacrifices - prosperity and respectability and the like, such as others had achieved before him. What he hoped and waited for was something indefinite and inexpressible: a sunrise, a melting of tire ice, an awakening from a painful, meaningless dream.
For a painful and confused dream was what his life seemed to him to be, when he looked at it with his eyes open and saw that it was filled with paltry pleasure, common cares and petty worries. Now and again he would write a few poems or short
stories to earn a little money, and to see how far his words could follow his thoughts; but with every new year that came, everything he had written the previous year would seem childish and worthless, and unlikely to develop into anything that could completely fill him with the happiness of creativity. In other respects, he more or less automatically performed all the actions, or rather gestures, that generally characterize a young government official or that circumstances might otherwise dictate. He went to his office as late in the day as possible and left it as early as decency permitted. He made acquaintances among colleagues at work and took part in their activities. He drank punch and went to suppers and visited cheap prostitutes; he loved music and often went to the opera, sitting in the fifth circle among the chimney-sweeps and the music lovers; and he sang quartets and was initiated into the order of Par Bricole, where an old headmaster hung the golden tin funnel on its rose-red band round his neck with kindly, fatherly hands.
And he said to himself:
“No, I am dreaming. This is not life.”
IX
Years passed.
------Martin was drifting about in the dusk. The streets and squares lay white, the snow was falling softly and silently. A man was walking in front of him in a zigzag lighting a lamp here and a lamp there.
Martin was drifting about aimlessly; he scarcely knew where he was going.
Suddenly he noticed he was crying as he walked along. He couldn’t really understand why. Normally he didn’t find it easy to cry. Some snowflakes must have settled in his eyelashes and made his eyes wet... He turned into a side street and came to a small park, he brushed past a couple half snowed in on a bench and went deeper in among the trees, where it was lonely and deserted and the branches were drooping, heavy with wet snow.
...Strange. A hovel in an alley, a smouldering lamp. Two naked arms bending and stretching in front of the window, and the sound of a blind being rolled down. And the girl, humming the last music-hall number as she slowly and indifferently unfastened her red underbodice - he hummed along to avoid having to talk - was she pretty or ugly? He didn’t know, he had scarcely looked at her. But she was not the one he longed for anyway.
He had been sitting at home in the dusk, the icy blue dusk of a March afternoon, turning an old poem that never seemed to work out properly over and over in his mind. Then all of a
sudden he had started to think about a woman. He had encountered her at lunchtime on his way home from work and had experienced a sudden intoxication. She was walking right in the sunshine, and a lot of men turned their heads to watch her as she went on her way. But she seemed not to notice or suspect anything. She was quite young, eighteen or perhaps twenty. She was neither expensively nor poorly dressed, but she held her head in a carefree, easy manner, perhaps a little proudly too, and went on her way, slender and upright, her brown hair gleaming in the sunshine, smiling to herself every now and again. He followed her at a distance; she went up towards Östermalm and finally vanished into a doorway.
Then she had come to him again in the twilight, as he was sitting in his rocking chair searching for rhymes, and would not leave him in peace. He threw down his pen and went out. The sun was no longer shining, and it was snowing. He came to the big grey house he had seen her going into and walked up and down on the pavement opposite, seeing windows light up here and there. Who was she? He remembered he had seen her exchange greetings with a gentleman he knew. He went up the stairs reading the names on the doors, eventually decided he was being childish and silly, turned up his coat collar and went out into the snow again. He took the arm of the first girl that gave him a meaningful glance and accompanied her home.
Now he was standing there in her bedroom, he was standing there numb and silent watching her as she undid her clothes, chatted and hummed. He asked himself quite simply whether she was beautiful. He knew only that she could have been prettier without tempting him any the more and uglier without tempting him any the less. She bore the hallmarks of her trade. She was still young, yet you could see that she had long since tired of picking and choosing among her customers. With the same habitual movements of her hand, the rough hand of a worker, she
would unfasten her cheap corset for anyone that demanded it of her, for the lieutenant and the book-keeper, the judge and the waiter, and she drew no distinction between them save that possibly, in her heart of hearts, she preferred the waiter, because he was less arrogant than the others and understood her better. Where did she come from? Perhaps from a backyard with a dustbin and a privy, perhaps from a cottage in the woods. The latter seemed the most likely; there was still the glint of a forest tarn in her eyes. Happy among other happy children, she had run barefoot about the hillsides picking wild strawberries. Early on, her contemporaries had taught her to take a bite of the forbidden fruit. Then she had come to the city and had gone the same way as many others. Basically, perhaps, it was not a necessity; she could have become a working man’s wife had she chosen to, but she thought their lot was harder and had, without much thought, gone the way that was best paved for her feet. With a bit more sense and better luck she could probably also have become a middle-class wife who goes to the market with her maid and haggles over the price of the boiled beef...
“Well,” she said, “aren’t you going to get undressed?”
He stared numbly at her and could suddenly understand nothing of the whole business, why he had come and what he wanted with her. He muttered something about not feeling well, laid a few crowns on the washstand and left. She did not get cross, she merely looked astonished, and she did not shout any abuse down the stairs after him.
It was still snowing. Was it never going to end, this winter? It was getting towards the end of March now, the trees were sagging under the snow, and it was bitterly cold...
Martin was tired. He sat down on a bench under one of the white trees, letting the snow form drifts on his hat and shoulders.
What are we doing with our lives, we humans?
The life he was leading, the paltry pleasure he looked for and sometimes also found, seemed to him at this moment like something out of a madhouse. Yet this was the normal sort of life. Most men he knew lived like this. He was twenty-three. He had been playing the game for four or five years now, he ought to have got used to it...
No, he did not understand people, nor did he understand himself. He often listened to the conversations of his friends and acquaintances about such matters. He had noticed that most respectable young men, and old ones too come to that, believed in two sorts of love, a pure sort and a sensual sort. Young girls of good family were to be loved with the pure sort, but that meant engagement and marriage, which they seldom had the means for. As a rule, it was therefore only wealthy girls that could inspire pure love; otherwise this emotion was more at home in lyric poetry than in real life. In contrast, the other sort, the sensual sort, was something that a young man could and should devote himself to once a week or so. But this whole aspect of existence was not regarded as having any serious meaning, it was not something that could make a person happy or unhappy, it was simply something funny: the stuff of amusing stories, and a form of recreation as pleasant as it was healthful, for occasions when they had collected their salary and drunk half a bottle of punch. In between times, the whole of sexual life occupied the respectable and decent men among them very little; they considered its functions disgusting and indecent, or, as they preferred to say, ‘beastly’, since they were unable to perform them without feeling like beasts themselves.
This idea was the prevailing one everywhere in society and, things being what they were, this way of life was declared the healthiest and wisest, admittedly not in the sermons of the clergy, the speeches of parliamentarians or the leading articles
of the newspapers, but in the enlightened judgement imparted from man to man in all circles. It was seen as necessary if young men were to keep their health and good humour and if young girls of good family were to keep their great virtue. So the young men drank punch and visited prostitutes and grew fat and rosy-cheeked, and not only did they manage to tolerate this life as they would a pitiful substitute, but it pleased them to such an extent that, even once they were married, they would often not disdain to pay visits to old haunts that they had grown fond of. And the young girls of good family were able to keep their great virtue, without anyone questioning its point, though for some of them the precious jewel became too much to bear in the long run...
What have we done with our lives, we humans?
Happiness, the joy of youth, where did it all lead? Life is made for old people; therefore being young is a misfortune. It is made for unthinking, dull people who accept false as true or even prefer the false; therefore thinking and feeling are a disease, a childhood illness that you must endure before becoming a man...
A woman’s shadow glided slowly past the bench where he was sitting, and she had scarcely passed when she stopped, turned her head and fixed him with two big, dark eyes.
He got up, shook off the snow and went on his way.
He walked quickly because he was frozen.
He was thinking about life and books. In his youth, a new kind of literature had made a breakthrough, one that was in open conflict with the prevailing public morality and worked towards changing it. Now it had fallen silent. Yet so little had been achieved, virtually nothing, and already people were throwing in the towel. Everything they had fought for, and for whose sake they had received and dealt such sharp blows, suddenly proved to be ‘eighties stuff and, as such, tried and found guilty once and for all, weighed on the scales and found to be too heavy. Instead,
all around him, the blue flower of poetry could be scented as never before. Once again the old words resounded like new, the woods and streams were again filled with centaurs and nymphs, knights and maidens strolled in the sunset, and once again Song herself stood in the midst of the folk with wide-open eyes, clear after their long sleep, singing as she had not sung for hundreds of years. Martin loved this poetry, its rhythms and words even crept into the verses he himself sat picking over in the twilight, yet at the same time it was all so strangely alien to him. After all, the world was the same as before, everything was taking its normal course, and no victory had been won - was it really the time for singing? To be sure, when he looked more closely, he did indeed also find ideas underpinning the new poetry, and these ideas too were in open conflict with conventional morality. But only a few people noticed the fact, and scarcely anybody attached any importance to it. It was poetry.
It was poetry; and as a forum for ideas, poetry was and remained about as useful as the Royal Opera. There too the baritone could rail against tyrants without any danger of failing to secure his Vasa Medal, there too seduction scenes were played out in Bengal lighting without anyone’s taking offence; things that the bourgeoisie called ‘disgusting’ in everyday life were seen by the same people in Faust or Romeo and Juliet as poetic, sweet and entirely suitable for young ladies. The same applied to poetry. Ideas swathed in verse and beautiful words were no longer contraband; people simply didn’t notice them.
Could there not once again come a man who spoke, not sang, and who spoke clearly!
...He had reached Strandvägen. The ice in Nybroviken had just broken up, and a tugboat was making its groaning way through the icefloes. On his left some recently built millionaires’
tenements towered through the snow and the fog, electric lights and cut-glass prisms were already shining from a long line of rooms in one of them, and a shimmering white tangle of dancing couples was moving behind the muslin curtains of a large room.
A few lonely wanderers had stopped in a group and were staring as though rooted to the spot at the paradise up there. Martin stopped for a minute too, before moving on, deep in thought. A few bars of the waltz had reached his ear; it was ‘Waves of the Danube’. He hummed it as he went along and could not get it out of his head.
O Eros, Eros. The harlot’s room, and the ballroom up there... The same god was being worshipped in both temples, and in both temples he was being worshipped by the same men. But the women...
He did not dance, yet he loved balls. He liked to stand in a doorway watching the others whirl by. What sort of mood was it that lay over these youthful celebrations, bewitching him and making him broody and sick with longing for the impossible? Look at the women... Tightly pressed in the arms of the men, their eyes half closed and their mouths open, the most innocent young girls sailed past in dresses that exposed or emphasized their young, panting bosoms. What were they thinking of, what were they dreaming of? There were probably some that didn’t think about anything and dreamt nonsense and had no desire other than to get their legs moving and get a little exercise, really young girls in the mould of their mothers and their aunts. But not all of them were like that. The daughters of mankind could not have changed that much since the days, not all that long ago, when youths and maids carried phallic images in procession, singing holy songs. What do they talk about, those young girls, when they sit together in a corner whispering? “So-and-so is secretly engaged to so-and-so.” “He’s in love with her, but she’s sweet on someone else. ” What do they read books
about? About the same sort of thing: about people in love with one another, and what happens then, and who gets whom in the end. To ‘get’ one another, what does it mean? You find that out on your wedding night.
But the years pass, and they may have to wait for the wedding. The young girl turns twenty-five, she approaches thirty, she is still dancing at balls with her eyes half closed, but her mouth is no longer open; she now knows it looks unseemly and keeps it tightly shut, a blood-red line. Is it never coming, the great miracle? Her expression is that of a drowning man. Save me, I am sinking, I am going under. Youth is so short, look, my complexion is already fading, my bosom is sagging and my young bloom is withering. She tries to be provocative and bold, she is afraid she was too shy before, which was perhaps not the right way... But the gentlemen are already laughing at her behind her back when they toast one another over their punch, and some of them openly make tun of her. Others understand her better and think to themselves that she could make a good wife and a tender lover. But they have no desire to get married, and besides, seducing a girl of good family is a dubious affair, and when they leave the ball they may well find their way to their old haunt without further ado, to the room with the smouldering lamp or with a red lamp from Leja’s department store hanging from the ceiling.
What are we doing with our lives, we men, and what are we doing with theirs?
Martin turned back towards town.
On a street corner he met a poet, who was freezing as he walked about in a thin, yellowish-green ulster. He was a couple of years older than Martin and was already slightly famous, since he wrote with incredible ease the most beautiful poetry
about anything under the sun, but mainly about girls and flowers and June nights on the plains of Skåne, where he came from. He had a pale face and a thin red beard, and when he met a colleague his big, childlike eyes would take on a wild, staring expression, as though he was deliberating with himself and saying: Shall I do him in, or should we go somewhere and consume alcohol?
They went up to the Anglais and drank green chartreuse.
The poet talked about himself. He confided to Martin that he was decadent. He worshipped everything that was in a state of decomposition and decay and doomed to ruin. He hated the sun and the light - and he shook his fist bitterly at the gas chandelier on the ceiling. He loved the night and sin and all liquors tinged with green. He had most known venereal diseases, and agoraphobia as well. Nothing in the world could induce him to walk across Gustav Adolf Square. This illness gave him particular pleasure, because he regarded it as a precursor of paralysie générale. And paralysie générale, that was the great sleep, that was Nirvana.
Martin listened absent-mindedly. The light is good, he said to himself, and the darkness is also good. But sometimes the darkness is evil, and the light evil too...
“But why is it,” he asked, “that your poems don’t really differ in any important respect from those that often win prizes from the Academy?”
At these words the poet’s expression darkened, and his lips suddenly became thin and narrow. He pulled a dirty knife out of his pocket, drew it halfway out and placed his finger on the bared blade.
“How much cold steel can you take?” he asked.
“You misunderstand me totally,” said Martin, laying his hand reassuringly on the poet’s arm. “I love your poems. But I just don’t really see the connection between them and your own
inner life as you have just depicted it...”
The poet smiled.
“It’s good to hear you like my poems,” he said. “What I’ve had published up till now is really just bullshit. It’s good enough for the rabble. Look at this...”
He took a newspaper cutting out of his pocket, a review of his latest collection of poems, which bore a well-known signature. The respected critic complained mildly that some of the poems could not be declared free from a certain hint of sensualism, which had a disagreeable effect. In others, the poet again struck a purer note, which seemed to promise great things for the future.
“I see, that was nice of him,” said Martin when he had read it.
“Nice?” The poet again made a convulsive grab for the pocket where his knife was. “Nice, you say? Shouldn’t the likes of him be crawling in the dust before the most abysmal of my poems?”
“Well yes,” said Martin, “yes, of course. But when it’s not usual for older people to behave like that towards their juniors...”
The poet drank in silence and remained silent for a long while.
Martin drank too. The strong green liquor burnt his palate and inside his head. And again the woman from this morning was there, the one who was walking in the sunshine and smiling. Was she perhaps asleep now, was she dreaming, was she smiling in her dreams? Or was she tossing sleeplessly in her bed, longing for a man?
Perhaps he should write to her. After all, he could easily find out her name. No. She would only show the letter to her friends, and they would giggle and laugh...
The café was nearly empty. In a corner right at the back, a
solitary regular customer was hidden behind a newspaper. In a mirror on another wall, an elderly gent with white sidebums and a red silk handkerchief sticking out of his breast pocket was dimly visible. He was watching the barmaid quietly and seriously. She was fat and red and white, red by nature and white with powder, and she was resting her chest and arms on the counter like a sphinx.
The poet let out a sigh. Martin looked at him - a child’s face beneath the red-bearded robber’s mask. He began to Link that he had perhaps offended him just now, and felt a need to say something friendly to him.
“Do you know what?” he said. “If you shaved off your beard, you would look like a really lecherous monk.”
The poet brightened up.
“Perhaps you’re right there,” he said, his gaze looking for his reflection in the mirror. “What’s more, I have written some poems that tend towards Catholicism. You should read my poems sometime, the real ones, the ones that couldn’t be published. ”
“Yes,” said Martin, “where do you live?”
The poet explained that he didn’t live anywhere. He had not had a home for three weeks now, and he didn’t need one. He wrote his poetry at café tables and slept with girls, and he had left his green-striped nightshirt with one of them, along with a few collars and Verlaine’s poems, and that was where his own manuscripts were too.
Martin was beginning to be really impressed, but he could find no words to express his feelings, and silence set in again between the two of them, whom Fate had brought together on a street corner.
The clock struck twelve, the gas was turned down to half power, and the poet felt inspiration approaching with the darkness and began to write verses on the table.
Martin said goodnight.
Stureplan lay white and empty. It was no longer snowing, the moon had risen, and it was even more bitterly cold. To the east, a new street with no buildings opened up like a big hole in a wall. To the west, a snowed-in huddle of tumbledown houses and gables stretched away into the moonlit fog, and from one of the streets of sin that snaked in among the buildings came the sound of women’s laughter and a door opening and slamming shut.
X
It was late when Martin got home, and he was tired out but could not get to sleep. Black butterflies fluttered before his eyes, and thoughts and rhythms came to him as he lay there, staring into the darkness. He sat up in bed and relit the candle on the bedside table, where paper and pen were to hand as usual. He did not have a fever or a temperature, he merely felt a deep weariness that was certainly painful but not deceptive; he saw clearly where his thoughts were wavering and needed the support of a rhythm, a snatch of melody; he altered things and crossed things out, and eventually it became a poem.
You up there,
You who are deaf and dumb!
You up there,
You who squeeze in your right hand
The fresh and fragrant fruit of goodness,
And squeeze in your left hand
The maggot-ridden, stinking fruit of evil,
And look on both
With equal satisfaction!
You up there,
You whose countenance is veiled
By all the emptiness of space -
I have a prayer to you.
A prayer, a single prayer,
That you cannot hear
And cannot grant:
Teach me,
Teach me to forget
That I have met your eyes.
You see,
When I was young
I made myself a god
In my own image,
A warm, living, battling god,
And I went out one spring day
To seek him in the world or in the heavens.
I found not him,
But you.
Not the god of life,
But that of death, behind a mask of life.
Take the memory of that sight away,
O terrible one! That memory
Is a secret illness, a worm, Consuming my very roots.
I know too well, with every wasted year And every day that vainly passes,
It gnaws closer to the nerves of my being.
It gnaws and consumes
Everything human and noble in me,
Everything that dares, decides and does,
And spares not
The wondrous, fragile clock within the soul That points to good or evil.
Tell me, you up there,
Is it your will
To reshape me in your image?
Is that your understanding of the saying “He who sees God must be condemned to die”?
O terrible one,
Do you not hesitate to infect Me, a child of Man, With your godly vices?
XI
The afternoon sun cast its light over the desk, turning everything golden: the writing implements and the books and the words he was writing on a piece of paper. The_smoke from the chimneys rose straight and still towards the heavens, and at a window opposite a young Jewish woman was playing with her child.
Martin was writing to his sister.
Dear Maria,
Thank you for your letter. Mama is poorly as usual, perhaps a little better these last few weeks. Papa is just the same, only he gets more silent with every year that passes. So it’s really peaceful here at home, for, as you know, I am not one for pointless chatter either. Silence is golden! Uncle Janne, Aunt Louisa et al. are unfortunately still alive and well, not that it matters, since we don’t stand to inherit anything from them anyway. But they always irritate me by asking about my career prospects, whether Papa is in line for the Vasa Medal soon, if it’s true that your husband uses morphine and so on. Apart from that, there is nothing wrong with them.
You ask whether I am writing much these days - no, very little, but on the other hand I have spent a long time deputizing as a principal clerk, and last night I dreamt so clearly that Papa and I were getting a Vasa Medal between us because the King couldn’t afford to give us one each.
Thanks for the invitation to visit you in the summer, but it looks as though nothing will come of it, since my temporary appointment is likely to extend over the summer. Sorry to hear of your husband’s nervous trouble. Glad your little boy is well. Everyone sends their love.
Your brother Martin.
He put the letter in an envelope and put it to one side.
He sat thinking about his sister.
Is she happy? he asked himself. And he was forced to answer: No, she is not happy. She perhaps doesn’t know it herself. Six years ago she was very happy, when she got married and became a doctor’s wife and got her own little home in the country to rule over, just what she had most dreamt of. And she hasn’t had any sudden fall from the pinnacles of happiness since then. She has just very gently slithered down, as tends to happen over the years. Her husband is kind and gifted and a good doctor, but he often falls out with the rich people in the area, and most of his patients are poor. So they are sometimes hard up for money. What is more, I fear his health has been undermined, and his disposition is sometimes a little bitter. Yet he was in very good spirits when he was last up here on his own, without her. He made the most of it, and I fear he was a little unfaithful to her.
A strange bird, happiness...
As he was thinking these thoughts, Martin had started writing again. He was writing slowly and half in fun, a sentence now and then, without really knowing where he was leading.
You do not know me. I met you one day in the sunshine. It was weeks ago, months even. You were walking on the side of the street where the sun was shining, you were
walking alone with your head bowed, smiling to yourself.
It was one of those days when the snow was starting to melt in the streets and the pavements were glistening wet and bright. You stopped on a street comer to exchange greetings with an old woman and had a talk with her. The old woman was very ugly and very stupid, and I also imagine she was a bit nasty, as stupid people tend to be. But when you looked at her and spoke to her, she immediately became less nasty and less ugly.
A little further up the street a gentleman spoke to you, and you nodded your head and returned the greeting. I felt my heart grow bitter with envy, and I followed him with my gaze as he walked down the street. But no-one could have told by looking at him that he had just exchanged greetings with you. People would have been more likely to think he was a lieutenant who had just spoken to a major.
I have often met you since then. You do not know me, and it is unlikely that you will ever find out who I am. You walk in the sunshine, I usually walk in the shade. I am dressed similarly to many other men, and I always avoid observing you in such a way that you would notice. No, you cannot find out who I am.
You have a lamp with a yellow shade. Yesterday you stood at your window for a long time in the pool of yellow light, gazing at the stars. You went to the window to roll down the blind, but you forgot yourself for a little while. Straight in front of your window was a star that was blazing more clearly than the others. I could not see it because I was standing squeezed into a little black doorway opposite the house where you live. But I know that these spring evenings it is in just the right position for you to see it from your window. It is Venus.
You do not know me, nor do I know you any differently from how I know the women who occasionally give me great pleasure by visiting me in my dreams at night. It is for this reason I am addressing you so intimately. But for some time now, you have been the only one of these women. The others have deserted me, and I feel no desire for them either.
Read this letter and do not worry about it. Burn it if you want to, or hide it at the bottom of your little secret drawer if you want to. Read it and do not worry about it, walk in the sunshine as you did before and smile at your own happy thoughts. But you are not to show it to your friends and let them titter and giggle over it. If you do, you will not be able to sleep for three nights in a row because of bad dreams, and a little demon from hell will sit on the end of your bed gazing at you from night through till morning.
But I know you will not do that, you will not show it to anybody. Good night, my beloved. Good night!
Martin sat for a long time with this letter in his hand. What can it lead to if I send it? he asked himself. - To nothing, probably. It will set her imagination going a bit, her girlish yearnings will perhaps get a little shove in tire direction of the new and unknown. She might show the letter to her friends, since belief in demons is now on the decline, but she will not burn it. She will perhaps be amused by it, and she will possibly even feel it her duty to be affronted. But in reality it will make her happy, and if one day, as Nature decrees, she gets married and has children and grows old under the strains of housekeeping, sinking deeper into the hopeless monotony of existence with every passing year, then she will come to remember this letter and to wonder who wrote it, and whether
that was perhaps where the seed of true happiness lay hidden. She will not even remember that once upon a time it angered her. Nor does it in fact contain anything that could justly offend her. It merely shows her that she is desired by a man, and since she is twenty years old and a particularly beautiful and lovely child of nature from head to foot, she must have already noticed that men desire her. And this does not anger her at all; on the contrary, it makes her happy and pleased, which is why she smiles as she walks in the sunshine.
As he was thinking these thoughts, however, he sat for a long time weighing the letter in his hand, as if it were a matter of life and death, until finally he decided his hesitation was ridiculous, put it in an envelope made of thick paper that nothing could be seen through, and wrote the address in a wispy, anonymous, girlish hand so that it should not arouse the curiosity of her family. Without revealing any noticeable interest, he had managed to find out her name. She was called Harriet Skotte. Her father had a country estate somewhere on Lake Mälaren, and she was now spending the winter with some relations in Stockholm in order to learn something: French or tapestry or something like that... In short, to get engaged...
Harriet Skotte. He repeated this name to himself and tried to grasp the impression it conjured up. He took the first name on its own, mumbling “Harriet, Harriet”. But it failed to give him any impression of what she was like; it merely aroused a vague notion of something English, pale and blonde, a sensation of tea vapours and beneficence and cold bedrooms with varnished floorboards like those in a hospital. The surname simply led his thoughts back to the family, to an uncle who was a principal secretary to the Board of Trade and a cousin who was a lieutenant in the Army Service Corps. But when he whispered the whole name to himself - “Harriet Skotte” - then it took on a whole new character that entirely displaced the others, then it
was something completely different and new, then it felt as though she herself were walking through the room, her brown hair gleaming in the ray of sunshine...
He gave a start when the hall bell rang, he heard the maid go and open the front door and a well-known voice ask whether he was at home. He stuffed the letter into his pocket, the next moment the door opened and Henrik Rissler was standing in the doorway, screwing up his eyes at the sun, whose copper-red rays were now falling horizontally across the room.
XII
Henrik Rissler had come down from Uppsala. He had just finished his degree and was to embark on a tour of Europe in a couple of weeks’ time, before writing his doctoral thesis ‘On Romantic Irony’. He had no means, but his uncle - the banker, politician and millionaire - had offered to finance his trip. Martin knew this already from Henrik’s letters. Before setting off, he was going to take things easy for a few weeks. He was somewhat exhausted, having worked hard so that he could get away from Uppsala as soon as possible, yet he had found time to write a couple of critical studies for a journal and, in so doing, had become slightly known among the twenty or so people that were interested in such things.
Martin had been expecting him for a few days and had a bottle of wine and a tin of cigarettes at the ready.
Henrik shaded his eyes against the sun with his hand.
“Everything is just the same here,” he said. “Time has stood still here.”
“Yes, more or less,” replied Martin. “Only they’ve built a big factory chimney there, right opposite. It’s been a great diversion for me in my loneliness. For a time I was working in competition with the builders, but I got left behind. I started a poem when they had just started the chimney; now the chimney is finished, but not the poem. Anyway, it’s beautiful, the chimney, actually. Especially at dusk, as a silhouette. The smoke is no longer belching out and you forget its purpose; it is not a chimney, but a tower, built by some noble Chaldean priest, who ascends it when night falls to chart the course of the
stars.”
“Yes,” said Henrik, “you forget its purpose, and only then does it become beautiful!”
“No,” Martin replied, “it does not become beautiful because you forget its purpose, but because you transform it through poetry into something else that enjoys the privilege of old and venerable poetic tradition. But in any case, factory chimneys themselves, without any transformation, are already among the most beautiful of modern buildings. They promise less than they can deliver, and at least they are not masquerading as figures, be they Gothic or Renaissance.”
Henrik smiled.
“Eighties stuff!” he said.
Henrik Rissler was sitting in his old place in the corner of the settee, Martin in the rocking chair by his desk. They drank wine and talked about Uppsala, about books and women and a new philosopher called Nietzsche. As they talked, the ray of sunlight, in which the dust was dancing like red sparks, grew ever narrower and more slanting and more saturated with red.
Martin was watching Henrik. He noticed a difference in him: his face was thinner, stronger, and the features more manly. Why had he said, “Everything is just the same here, time has stood still here”? For him, then, time had not stood still. He had experienced something, but what? He was in love, probably, he was perhaps simply going to get engaged - to whom? Was it his cousin Anna Rissler - she was fond of him, he knew. No, it probably wasn’t her. Was it Maria Randel, or Sigrid Tesch?
“It’s remarkable,” said Henrik, “do you know the feeling? -how painful it is when you look for old moods and can’t find them. To reread a book that you were fond of, or to hear an
opera in which you used to find all that there was to find and a bit more besides - and to sit there empty-handed, wondering what it was all about.”
“Yes,” said Martin, “it’s a strange, distressing feeling. You feel as though you have obligations to your past, as though you are committing a breach of trust... And you can’t do anything about it. Why is it actually so painful - is it perhaps because there is no plaintiff in the case, no clearly formulated demands to be met? For the plaintiff is not the book or the music that you have fallen out of touch with, not the mood that eludes you - the plaintiff is your own old self, which is dead and buried, which has been annulled and refuted by the new one, which has no case to plead, yet pleads a case of sorts. There’s the contradiction, and there’s nothing so painful as a contradiction when it isn’t funny.”
Henrik picked up the thread:
“Yes, you’re right, the dispute is between the old and the new self, and as long as there’s a new one that’s stronger you can always overcome the shadows. It’s a constant fluctuation. Old things pass, and new ones come - yes, old things pass, that’s really the only certainty, but for how long can we be sure that new ones will come in their place? What if the supply stops one day, what if nothing under the sun is new anymore and we just get poorer with every year and every day that passes?”
“Yes,” Martin said, “these things happen sometimes. And there are cases of people turning the whole thing round and digging out the oldest thing of all, the most dead and withered, and starting to worship it anew without seeing the caricature. That’s just about the worst thing of all. Then I’d rather have the well-known prescription: poor but proud.”
They sat in silence for some moments. The sun was gone, but it was not yet dusk. The room was almost lighter than it had been; everything inside had suddenly turned pale.
Henrik broke the silence.
“Yes,” he said, “it’s a melancholy feeling, growing out of yourself and your old moods — but what does it matter, as long as you’re growing! And what is melancholy, anyway, other than what the ruffian said of the toothbrush: a new means of amusement that the upper classes have come up with. But it’s only melancholy as long as it’s concerned simply with moods and music and ideas. I’ve actually been thinking about something else the whole time. I’ve been thinking about women and about love. When you get into that sphere, it just isn’t melancholy anymore, no, you don’t get off so lightly. You are in love with a woman. You want to put the whole of infinity into your feelings. And yet you cannot escape the conclusion that this emotion must be subject to the same law of fluctuation as everything else in the world, and that you will one day grow tired of the one you love, just as you have grown tired of the moonlight music in Faust. I haven’t experienced many love affairs but, believe me, I have never, not even in my imagination, started the game without tire silent prayer, ‘Let her be the first to tire, and not me!”’
“I fear this prayer generally isn’t heard,” said Martin. “I dare say both a lover and a husband can be deceived, but it certainly seldom happens when they want it to.”
“Yet I’m ashamed of this prayer, because I know it stems directly from the great cowardice of my heart. It’s a far cry from your original simple and straightforward grasp of these matters to consider it better to be deceived than to deceive! Yet that’s how I see it. What does love actually mean to me, what does it mean to a man in general? How can there possibly be anything tragic in a man’s being deceived in love? If he takes it as a tragedy, then he becomes comical. If a man interrupts his reading of a good book on discovering he is a cuckold, then he deserves to be one. Women, now... With them it’s quite another
matter.”
Henrik’s gaze stared into the void.
“Jilted women,” he said, “there’s something peculiar about them. You can’t easily get away from them. - Yes, if they quarrel and clamour and make a scene, then it immediately becomes much easier, the whole thing becomes burlesque, you shake it off and you’re free. Then you ask yourself, ‘How was I ever able to love that person?’ - you easily convince yourself that you never did love her, and then she’s out of the story. But the others... What strikes me as the most painful thing of all is to imagine the girl I love withered and pale, cast aside, left in the shadow of life, while 1 myself go on living... It’s a paradox, I know, it can never happen; you can’t simultaneously act one way and feel another. And yet... I just met an old woman in the street here, right outside your door. She was old and faded and a bit ridiculous. She was also very poorly dressed, a pauvre honteuse. You often see old women like that, there was nothing remarkable about her, nothing that made her any different from many others like her, apart from the fact that suddenly, when I got close to her, she seemed to be so like... Well, I might as well tell you straight off. There is a certain young lady of whom I am very fond. 1 am so fond of her that we are going to get married, perhaps very soon. That was who she resembled, in spite of the difference in age and everything else - what’s more, it was such a vague resemblance that you seemed to see it one moment, and the next moment it was gone without your knowing what it was. But that moment was enough for me, a chill ran through me, a shiver, as though I had seen something dreadful, and it only seemed worse because everything else was as usual, the sun was shining and there were people about in the street... The woman I love stood before me, she passed me, withered, cast aside, slightly ridiculous. It seemed that not even the thought that I myself was dead and buried would be
sufficient to comfort me - the only notion that could bring any relief was that I was as wretched and as worn down as she was.”
They sat in silence for a long while.
“Tell me,” Martin finally asked, “who is she, the girl you’re in love with? - Assuming you’re able to say. Do I know her?”
“Yes,” answered Henrik quietly, “you know her, and I can tell you. It’s Sigrid Tesch.”
Sigrid Tesch. Martin saw before him a young, supple figure, a mass of dark hair, a delicate, regular face. He had met her a couple of times, very briefly. He knew that she had made an impression on Henrik, and she had also drifted past on occasion in his own twilight thoughts, with a pale, dreamlike smile.
So she, Sigrid Tesch, was to be Henrik’s bride...
“Yes,” said Henrik, “it’s inexplicable, isn’t it, that anyone can ever dare to let himself in for something like love... And yet!”
“Yes,” Martin said, “and yet...!”
They both smiled.
Henrik Rissler got up.
“It’s dusk now,” he said, “and we can scarcely see the glasses. Are you coming out? It’s wonderful outside this evening. I see, you’re going to write - oh well, I’ll probably see you again soon, goodbye!”
XIII
It was dusk now, almost dark, and Martin was still sitting in the rocking chair at his desk and could not bring himself to get up and light the lamp. There was still a little wine left in the bottle; he poured it into his glass and drank it. He had opened the window to let the smoke out, and amid the trampling of feet, which, like the sound of a hundred ticking clocks, drifted up to him from below, he heard the house door opening and shutting, and footsteps receding down the street - that was Henrik. Martin thought about his love affair and what he had said about it, and it suddenly struck him how his own infatuation, simply by coming into contact with this grain of reality, dissolved and vanished like mist or a dream. Harriet Skotte... He asked himself: If I read in the paper tomorrow that she has got engaged or married, or that she is dead - what will it mean to me? Nothing, no lost reality, not even a hope that has been shattered, merely a mood that bursts and that soon would have burst anyway.
He took the letter he had written out of his pocket, opened it and read it again. I shall bum it, he thought. - No, why burn it? I might be able to use it sometime, in a short story.
He flung it into a drawer in his desk, among other manuscripts, and sank into dreams again.
Suddenly his mother was standing in the doorway. She was holding a lamp in her hand and bending forward to look at him.
“You’re sitting here in the dark,” she said. “Papa has gone
out. May I sit in here with you for a while?”
Martin nodded. She put the lamp on the table, went to get her workbasket and her sewing things, and sat down to sew.
She sat there in silence for a long time, bent over her work. Finally she raised her eyes, which were swollen with tears and sleepless nights.
“Tell me, Martin,” she said, “you mustn’t be cross, but one day when you were out I couldn’t help opening a drawer in your desk and having a look at your papers. Otherwise I should never find out what you’re thinking about. What I found made me so worried that I had to sit down and cry. I didn’t understand it, I don’t even know if it was meant to be poetry or what it was, but I just thought it was full of dangerous blasphemies. I was so afraid that for a second I almost thought you were not in your right mind. I know of course that I don’t understand anything, but this much I can see: that writing this way won’t get you anywhere. Yet you can write so beautifully when you want to.”
Martin was silent. What should he answer? He suspected, or at least imagined, that his mother had really wanted to say something quite different, and that this - that he wouldn’t be able to get on in the world - was really only an emergency exit that she reached for when thoughts and words deserted her. She had probably felt and suspected that the poem she had found in the drawer was meant to be interpreted quite differently from how she was now pretending to believe; she wanted him to explain himself, to talk to her about his thoughts, she was banging at the door: Let me in, don’t leave me outside, I’m freezing, it’s so lonely! But he did not open the door, for he could not, he had never shut it, it had locked itself. How should he answer her? Her words had filled him with deep dejection. If he had any ambition, then it was to write in a way that anyone could understand with a little goodwill. He had no taste for any sort of literary freemasonry, he did not like to think of a
literature for the chosen few, nor had it escaped him how readily it came about that nobody wanted to be chosen. Now it was suddenly clear to him how hopeless his ideal was: there was no art for everyone and there were no thoughts for everyone; on the contrary, the simplest ideas in the clearest language were seldom understood by anyone other than those already acquainted with that particular school of thought. How could he talk to her about his thoughts when her vocabulary, shaped as it was by the monotony of the years, was not even sufficient to express her own innermost thoughts and feelings? The god his poem dealt with was Spinoza’s god, the Earth Spirit, but this god was merely an intellectual experiment, whereas hers, his mother’s, was at least a creature of the imagination and therefore always had a bit more life and blood to it. How could he explain to her that what she called blasphemies did not apply to her god? She would have replied that there was only one god. He knew everything she would say in reply, so he remained silent, looking out of the window and listening to the Saturday trample of tired feet in the street below and to the rain that was starting to fall on the windowsill. And what she had said about his future, how could he answer that? To that there was only one answer: to create happiness, to become famous. That answer he could not give. If one day I achieve a success, he thought to himself, a success that would please her, she will probably no longer be alive. That’s always the way it is. Why should I hope for an exception for her and me? What should he do next, should he put his arms round her neck, should he stroke her hair and kiss her? No, that would not have come naturally, he did not care for that sort of deception and neither did she; he knew her, she would never have been satisfied with that. She had asked a question and was expecting an answer. He could give no answer, so he stayed silent.
He stayed silent, at the same time feeling the silence aching
in his chest, and because he was unable to say anything, he instead sought her eyes with his gaze, those eyes that once upon a time had shone so bright and blue when they looked into his. Yes, it was still the case that sometimes, in the middle of dinner or at the tea table in the evening, she would look at him and nod and smile, as bright as she used to be, in the same way that mothers nod and smile at their small children before they can speak. Perhaps she had the feeling that time had come full circle, and that this smile was the only means of expression she had left at her disposal when she wanted to communicate with her child. This was how he could have wished her to look at him now, and nod her head and smile a smile far removed from all the meaningless things that separated them.
But she was not smiling now, she was sitting in silence with her hands folded on her knee; and her eyes, which normally cried so easily, were now staring into the shadows, free from tears, as though looking for something and asking: Are all mothers as unhappy as I am? As lonely? As deserted by their children?
The flame of the lamp quivered in the night wind. She got up and said goodnight, picked up the lamp and went.
XIV
Martin sat by the window for a long time.
“Time has stood still here,” Henrik Rissler had said. Yes, he was right. It stood still here, time did. It is with changes that people measure the passing of time; I have nothing to measure it with. I shouldn’t even know it was Saturday today if I couldn’t tell from the footsteps down there.
He started thinking about an old story. Once upon a time there was a sinner who died in his bed one night. The next morning he woke up in hell, rubbed his eyes and called out, “What’s the time?” But beside him was the Devil, smiling and holding up a clock with no hands. Time was over, eternity had begun.
Eternity - no more rush...
Other people have day and night, holidays and weekdays, Christmas and Easter. For me, it all flows into one. So am I already in eternity?
And he went on thinking: Tomorrow is Sunday. What does that mean to me? It means that tomorrow I have a day off from my apparent work, and that I therefore feel the demands of what ought to be my real work twice as strongly. But if the weather is nice, I shall of course go out for a walk... So it will not be a proper Sunday whatever I do. What strange sort of job have I taken on, is it not best to give it up while there is still time, to submit myself to the rule that applies to others? You are never finished in this job, you never have a feeling of rest and peace. Plenty of Mondays with a hangover, but never a proper Sunday, never again!
My apparent and my real work - how long shall I be able to keep up the illusion? The truth is, I am well on the way to getting a permanent appointment, I shall be on the salaried staff in eight to ten years’ time, and I shall retire with a pension in forty years’ time. My poor mother would save herself a lot of worry if she saw all this as clearly as I do. But she believes in her innocence that the stuff I write on a few scraps of paper at night will hinder my progress, for she has no idea how boundlessly indifferent people are to ideas. To damage my chances of promotion, I should have to write personal abuse of my superiors, and why should I do that? They are decent chaps and have obtained gratuities and remunerations for me, regardless of whether others have deserved them more. They have certainly taken a liking to me. I shall never be the one to put a torpedo under the Ark, they have sensed that instinctively, and they are probably right.
He felt he was going to disappear into the crowd. He could not decide whether he was basically like everyone else and this fate was therefore his just lot, or whether he was perhaps too much of an exception to be able to assert himself even among the exceptions - he merely felt that the rule held him more strongly in its power with every day that passed, and that he was going to disappear into the crowd. And the other thing, his writing, what was it, and where could it lead? Once, when he needed money, he had gathered together a bundle of his poems and gone round the publishers. A couple of them had wanted to publish the poems, but none of them had wanted to pay anything. “No,” he had answered very earnestly, “do not count on my ambition! ” When he got home, he had once again cast an eye over these poems and had once again, as on so many previous occasions, found them trivial and empty. Most of them had been written for sale straight to a newspaper and bore all the hallmarks of this fact. And he said to himself: How
equivocal all involvement with ideas is for the man who does not have a secure existence! As deftly as a priest delivering a funeral homily manages to transform the deceased’s means of livelihood into a mission in life, so swiftly and mercilessly can existence transform a mission in life into a means of livelihood for the man with no means. And if only it would then become a real means of livelihood, but no, it doesn’t, distaste and weariness set in, you grow tired of everything and sink back, back into the crowd.
Back into the crowd: you do as others do, then at least no more conjuring is required, you can keep track of time again, you have holidays and weekdays, work and rest - true rest...
The cold night air was streaming in through the window; he was frozen but could not bring himself to stretch out his arm and shut the window. The rain was still falling, and, as they often did when he was very tired, his thoughts started to run in rhythms and rhymes.
I sit alone in the darkness,
Alone with the fall of the rain,
Alone with the splash of the raindrops
Outside on the windowpane.
My heart is heavy with anguish,
My breath, it will not stay,
For, just like the rain in the gutter, My youth is seeping away.
Winter Night
I
Above Martin’s table in the office, an electric lamp with a green shade was swinging gently to and fro on its silken cord, like a pendulum. It had just been set in motion when he turned it on. He did not stretch out his hand to stop it, but calmly waited for the moment when the oscillations slackened off and faded away to become unnoticeable. The lamps were being turned on above the other tables too, six shining green triangles were swaying slowly to and fro in the twilit room, and by the windows thin, clerical hands were groping for the curtain cords to draw them across, shutting out the snow and the winter darkness. Martin loved these green lamps that did not give off heat or smell nasty, and whose light had the pure, cold gleam of precious stone, and he longed for the day when electric light would be cheap enough to penetrate even the homes of poor folk. And just here, in this big, low old room with whitewashed walls, these green lamps seemed to him to suit the atmosphere better, precisely because the building was old and had a vaulted roof above the entrance and low windows with small panes on the mezzanine, where his office was; he saw in them a symbol of the continuity of development, an unbroken chain of hands and wills, from those who had long since grown weary to those who were still an embryo, the new interwoven with the old... Where everything is old, there is an air of destitution and decline, and where everything is new, only the man can thrive who himself is new from top to toe, from his wallet to his soul.
And Martin was not new, his clothes were not new, nor were his thoughts, he did not think or know much apart from what
other people had taught him, a few old gentlemen from England and France who were mostly dead now. If these thoughts still gave him any pleasure, it was mainly because Time seemed to have forgotten them long ago, as though they had been written in running water. Other winds were blowing now, winds against which he preferred to turn up his collar over his ears, everything was coming back and all the corpses were watching, but he chose not to see them. The swinging lamp over his table had come to a standstill, and he went back to his calculations. He was no longer satisfied with placing ticks; he conscientiously checked each entry and added up each column. The aversion of his early youth to a routine job had long since disappeared, and he had gradually come to notice that these calculations were certainly not, as he had believed at first, free from the imperfections inherent in everything human. On the contrary, they were often marred by irregularities and mistakes, and when from time to time he discovered such a mistake, he rejoiced inwardly, feeling a distant swell of sorrow at the same time. He rejoiced because he had had a chance to show how diligent he was, and because he was able to count on getting his rightful percentage of the amounts that his alertness had saved the State coffers; and he felt a dim recollection of old sorrow when he reminded himself that, in the past, he had demanded quite a different sort of pleasure from life. Sometimes he also thought of the poor official in Landskrona, Åhus or Haparanda who had got his sums wrong, perhaps under the influence of the previous day’s toddy, and would now pay the price. But this thought left him cold, since the years had taught him that you have to place limits on your sympathy.
The room was warm, the remains of a huge birchwood fire were still glowing in the stove - there was no reason to economize on the government’s wood in those days, when people had to cut down on fuel at home - and von Heringslake,
a senior principal clerk who had a private income of four thousand six hundred crowns and discharged his duties with the delightful ease that comes from having a position of independence, was crouching in front of the stove roasting apples over the embers. The triangular reflection of a green lamp twinkled on his shiny bald pate, which his mortal enemy, Assessor Camin, maintained was a result of earlier dissipations, but which in reality shone with the innocence of early childhood. The smell of roast apples spread and tickled Martin’s nose, and it bitterly annoyed him that he did not share Heringslake’s views on this life and the coming one, because then he would certainly have been offered an apple. From Camin’s seat, the old adage rang out for the hundredth time: “Things will not be right in this country until we see a price put on the heads of the peasants.” And at the bottom table, over by the door, where it was draughty and there was the wet smell of umbrellas and outdoor garments, the youngest generation was beavering away placing ticks, and simultaneously trying to recall in a whisper the previous night’s revelry and the number of rounds of punch consumed.
Martin was still young, since people age slowly in the service of the State, but he was no longer one of the youngest and was not required to sit in the draught by the door. He was on first-name terms with most of his immediate superiors and older colleagues, and in his turn did not shirk the duty of suggesting first names to those younger than himself. These formalities usually took place at a supper together in December. It was to be held in a few days’ time, and the list of names was currently circulating in the office, but Martin did not put his name down. He had other uses for his money, and there was only one newcomer he would have wanted to be on intimate terms with, a young man who sat opposite him at the same table, and about whom there was something that struck him as
familiar and aroused his instinctive sympathy: the empty, dreamy gaze and the mechanical gesture he made when placing ticks. Martin would often talk to him about the state of the world and was pleased to get sensible answers sometimes. Now, when he handed him the list of names without adding his own, the other man looked up and asked in a tone of voice that perhaps contained a hint of disappointment:
“Aren’t you coming to the party?”
“No,” replied Martin, “I’m otherwise engaged. But we who are above all prejudice can dispense with the titles anyway.”
The other man blushed a little, and they shook hands across the table.
“Tell me,” said the other man after a while, “why does Camin want to put a price on the heads of the peasants?”
“I don’t really believe he wants to,” replied Martin. “He must know full well that a price on the heads of the peasants would make food even more expensive than taxes do. He is merely repeating an old phrase that he heard in his youth when he was a supernumerary. It has made an impression on him because it gives expression to a collective antipathy, a class hatred, and the average man always needs to hate and love collectively. Beware of that, for it is one of the surest signs of a mean outlook. He likes women, civil servants, leading actors and people from Västergötland, since he comes from Västergötland himself, and he hates peasants, Jews, Norwegians and journalists. It’s true that the peasants are somewhat stingy with their rewards for the good work he and we others here in the office do for the country, which is the main reason why he hates them. But in this they are only following the same principle as all other employers: paying as little as the competition allows. If a shortage of civil servants arose, they would pay more.”
Von Heringslake, who had now eaten his roast apples and resumed his seat at the table next to Martin, turned round on his
chair and looked at him sadly.
“You don’t have a heart,” he said.
It was gone three o’clock; here and there, people were gathering their papers together and leaving off. Martin got up, took his coat and hat, put out his green lamp and departed. He had mourning crape on his hat, because his mother had died.
II
He headed along Västerlånggatan. On snowy days like this, he nearly always went this way. In the narrow, winding crevice between the tall old buildings it was almost like being indoors, sheltered from the worst gusts of wind.
Winter, the cold... Strange to think there are people who claim to like this weather. Heringslake, who has a heart in his breast and loves his country, regards the cold as preferable to warmth. But when it’s cold he always wears a fur coat. The idea of hell as a very hot place clearly betrays its origins in hot parts. If northerners had invented it, it would on the contrary have been a nasty, draughty hole, a nest of influenza and chronic colds. But this climate being what it is, I have got used to it, and it has perhaps even done me important favours that I myself am unaware of. After all, people put food on ice so that it keeps, everything keeps longer in the cold, so why not people too? Once upon a time I longed to be consumed by the fire of a great passion. It never came; either I was not worthy of such a great honour, or whatever reason. But now, latterly, I have begun to suspect that such a conflagration is more a bonfire for onlookers than any real pleasure for the person involved. In any case, fire is clearly not my element. If one day some real spring sunshine enters my life, I shall probably rot immediately through being unaccustomed to the climate.
He stopped for a moment in front of a jeweller’s window. Most of the items were characterized by a vulgarity of taste, which indemnified him for the fact that he could not buy anything. But once, a year ago to the day, he had bought a little
ring with a green emerald. And the woman he had given it to was still wearing it and would not wear any other ring. She said she would not even wear a plain gold ring; and in any case, he could not offer her such a ring...
I am ungrateful, he said to himself, a little sunshine has entered my life at last, perhaps more than most people have. But I have been freezing for too long; certainly I haven’t thawed out yet.
He had emerged into Mynttorget, the raging north wind swept the snow into his eyes and, almost blinded, he groped his way along towards North Bridge. He had to stop again to get his breath back outside Loostrom’s bookshop, where the current celebrities were on display in the window: Crispi*, King Milan’ and Taine. Between an excellency and a forger he discovered a face that seemed familiar. It was a Swedish poet, it was the decadent who had once explained his outlook on life to Martin over a green chartreuse at the Anglais. He was not there because he had suddenly become a great man, but because he was dead.
Martin continued on his homeward way.
At long last someone who had achieved his aim. His aim was a bit unusual, and he didn’t achieve it entirely as he had envisaged doing so; he never got the paralysie générale of his dreams, but died simply and unpretentiously of consumption. But I don’t believe he was too concerned with the details; in reality, he just wanted to go under, no matter how. And perhaps he was right: that’s the sort of aim you should set yourself if you want to achieve it during your lifetime. To be sure, you can also
set yourself the aim of becoming a millionaire or a bishop or a cabinet minister, and you can usually achieve that aim too if you seriously want to. There are so inordinately few people capable of directing all their willpower towards a single aim that they scarcely need fear competition. Everyone wants to be rich; but most people at the same time want to live as though they already were, they want to enjoy themselves a little, to have an after-dinner nap, to drink champagne with girls and so on, and so they never become rich, they don’t become cabinet ministers or even bishops. Anyone who wants to stop off here and there along the way and enjoy life a little before he reaches his destination will never get there - and the others, the few indefatigable travellers, the men of will, who do make it, what are they left with once their destination is reached? On the other hand, it is perhaps unnecessary to squander a lot of energy on the aim of going under. It is an aim that can quite certainly be achieved for a lesser price: it is getting closer anyway, slowly but surely. The best thing is perhaps the one that other dead man back there in the bookshop window loved so much during his life; a big tree and calm thoughts. For it is not quite true what Messer Guido Cavalcanti* said when he felt death approaching: that it is as futile to think as it is to act. In one sense it is certainly true, namely in so far as the end result is always the same black pit, and as an observation on death, Messer Guido’s words have some value. But looking at it another way, it is clear that the man who enjoys thinking is always slightly better off in this incalculable world than the man of action. Because, for him, the minute is worth something in itself, regardless of any vague aims for the future. The man who wants to become Pope or a Knight of the Order of the Seraphim and sacrifices everything, the joys of both thinking and loving, to achieve that
end - and the former sacrifice at least is unavoidable - and gets a fishbone stuck in his throat and dies before he has achieved it: his life is nothing, a sentence started but not finished. But the man whose strength lies in thinking, his life can be cut short at any time, yet is like the serpent in folklore: it is just as much alive, it is also worth something as a fragment; indeed, strictly speaking, it never set out to be anything more than a fragment. For the man whose strength lies in thinking cannot set himself any ordinary human objective, or if he occasionally does so, then it is immaterial and trivial, and it matters not whether he reaches it or misses it.
Martin had come up the hill to Östermalm and was nearly home. He was hungry and longing for his dinner, but he stopped at a street corner and looked up at a window, high up on the fourth floor.
Yes, there was a light up there, so she was at home. He knew this already anyway, and he also knew that she was expecting him after dinner. In the evening they were going to the theatre together. They would sit in a stage box, behind a lattice, where no-one could see them.
He had found a ladyfriend. Chance had brought them together. She worked mornings in a life assurance company counting money. She worked to keep herself. She did have an elderly father somewhere out in the country, a retired forester, who wrote her a letter three times a year, but she stood on her own feet and was not dependent on anyone. Like other young girls, she had dreamt for a long time of finding proper happiness, and had guarded her treasure and hoped to get married. She had fancied and had crushes on men who hadn’t even noticed. But these small flames had gone out, because no-one had fuelled them, and if a man who was not altogether
ridiculous or repugnant had been willing to offer her his hand, she could probably easily have convinced herself that she loved him. But she had seen the years trickle away, she had gone dancing in the winter and cycling in the summer, and a lot of men had given her to guess, through glances and half-spoken words, that they badly wanted to have her. But none of them wanted to marry her, because she had no wealth and did not come from an influential family. Moreover, the thrifty and unassuming men among them were frightened off by her elegance; for she had good, definite tastes and two industrious hands, and many a night she would sit up by lamplight, sewing dresses from cheap remnants and old scraps of material, dresses which then, to inexperienced eyes, gave the impression of having cost a lot of money, and which even aroused doubts about her virtue among one or two of the most sceptical. Yet she was not pretty enough for those men whose feelings are dictated by their vanity, nor did her person have enough of the sweet, sheep-like quality about it that is designed to captivate those who want to be master in their own home or who have quite simply grown tired of bachelor life and are therefore on the lookout for a nice, sweet, cheap and obedient little wife. Both her own nature and her external circumstances were such that she did not have much prospect of being loved for any reason other than true love, and she had gradually begun to suspect that this emotion, which is spoken and written about so much, is in reality despised and suppressed and rare in the extreme. She had thought all this over, she had felt the minutes slipping through her hands like sand, and concluded that the years still to come would be even more wretched and worthless than those that had gone, and that the jewel she was guarding was losing more of its value with every day that passed. What had scared her most of all was the way women without husbands aged so rapidly, unless they were among the fortunate ones who
felt no strong desire or want. But she was not one of them, no, she was a real woman, and she knew it. The desire that in her first flush of youth had merely been a sweet, undefined longing, a dream of some strange, unknown form of happiness, was now burning like a poison in her blood, and her first timid girlish fantasy, which scarcely dared venture beyond a kiss at twilight between rose hedges, had over the years turned into a picture book far worse than the one the Sandman shows the naughty children in the story. Her gaze had become searching and questioning, and she tried to pull herself together and make a decision. She had virtually given up hope of a husband; it was a lover she was seeking, and for a long time she sought him too without success. It was not that there were not plenty of men who would gladly ask her for a dance; on the contrary, there were lots, and she could take her pick. She looked round the assembled company and flirted right, left and centre. She became less concerned about her reputation than she used to be, and went to secret rendezvous with men who had flirted with her at a ball one evening. But they remained strangers to her, and every time the decisive moment drew near, she would be overcome with shame and would suddenly turn ice-cold with fear and repugnance. For, every time that moment came, she read in the man’s eyes the unfathomable brutality of his heart. She read, as clearly as if it were written on a piece of white paper, that what for her was a whole new life, perhaps her downfall, perhaps her salvation, was for him a gallant adventure. She read that the act she was on the point of committing was really, in his view, a lapse that he would overlook as long as it gave him any pleasure. And she read that not only did he plan to abandon her very soon, but he also intended to set his conscience at ease first by showing her his contempt. She saw all this and grew tired of the game before it had even started, and she asked herself whether it might not be
best to follow the path of virtue, which at any rate was clearly the most comfortable, and to grow old and wither without will and without hope. But when she met Martin, everything was different, and when she gave herself to him she no longer felt any fear, since she saw that he had understood her and that his thoughts were not like those of other men, and she sensed that he loved her. And in front of him she felt no shame, nor did she feign any, since she had already sinned so much in her thoughts that the reality seemed innocent and pure. She was no longer young; like him, she was getting on for thirty. Her complexion already bore traces of the first frost, and shattered illusions had made her bitter-hearted and foul-mouthed. But her bitter heart beat warmly and rapidly when it was resting against his, and the foul language did not make her mouth any the less sweet to kiss.
III
Martin was sitting alone with his father at the dinner table, inside the same circle of yellow light as had surrounded the sleepy winter evenings of his childhood. Martin Birck and his father seldom had anything to say to each other. They thought differently about everything, apart from taxes on food. This lack of agreement, however, was not something that caused them any unhappiness; they did not attach any importance worth mentioning to it. They both knew that different generations think differently, and found this only natural. Nor did they feel that the silence was in any way painful or oppressive; it was merely the self-evident expression of the fact that nothing had happened that could give rise to an exchange of opinions. When they spoke to each other it was mostly about promotions in the office and new buildings. Martin’s father was interested in his city. On Sundays he would often go for long walks to distant parts of town to see how new blocks were shooting up out of the ground, and he would think about how Stockholm had developed since his youth. He thought all these new buildings were beautiful, especially if they were big and splendid and had lots of windows and turrets at the corners. When Martin heard his father talk about all these ugly buildings and call them beautiful, he thought how unjust life was in closing the road to the inner realms of beauty so implacably to those very members of society who are the best and most useful. For the road there passes through melancholy, there is no other way, and it was not for nothing that the Greek musician answered
Alexander, “May the gods never make you so unhappy, my lord, that you learn to understand music better than I do.” But Martin’s father’s childhood had been much too troubled, and his manhood much too full of hard work and the fulfilment of duty, for him to know anything of the melancholy with which life punishes the man who thinks more about beauty and ugliness and good and evil than about his daily bread.
Today, as usual, Papa chatted about one thing and another over coffee and a cigar. He talked about a gentlemen’s dinner party he had been to the day before, where he had been embarrassed by his Vasa Medal; he had gone wearing the large, official decoration, which was the only one he had, whereas the other gentlemen had had neat little miniature medals.
“And because of that,” he said, “I looked like the biggest fool present. ”
“Yes,” Martin said, “appearances were clearly against you, Papa. But in fact the others’ miniature medals were sure proof that their foolishness was greater, since, for the sake of their decorations, they had subjected themselves to more expenditure than was strictly necessary.”
“Yes,” Papa answered, “that’s what I thought too, but I was still ashamed.”
The conversation went dead. Martin had started thinking about various stories he had heard concerning honours: about the man who got the Vasa Medal for sending flowers to Queen Sophia Hospital on days when the Queen visited, and the man who got the Order of the Polar Star for buying a house. But he could not bring himself to tell them aloud because, when he thought about it more closely, it seemed possible to him that these stories, which he found so amusing, might not have entirely the same effect on the old man, who had earned his
medal through forty years of poorly paid work in the service of the State and therefore could not help regarding it with a certain degree of seriousness, even if he did joke about it in conversation.
The silence enveloped them, Papa smoking his cigar and staring into the darkness lurking beyond the window, and Martin sitting deep in thought. He was thinking about the history of his home: how it, like other homes, had come into being and grown and blossomed, and how then the bonds had broken, one by one, his sister married, his mother dead. The best time, the flowering season, for most people is probably the time when the children have just grown up and the old folk are still not really old. To be sure, he had often heard old women say that the happiest tune is when the children are small. Yes, that can indeed be the case, for mothers. But he remembered the years when his sister had just grown up and was about to be married off. In those days, the home was happy: young people, friends, music. The piano, which was now silent, still held the waltzes and operatic medleys of years gone by, and often, when he was lying awake at night, he could still hear in his head the Norwegian folksongs people used to sing in those days. Songs in which a part of his youth lived on, and which now seemed filled with all the strange melancholy of times past. And so it had suddenly become silent, more silent with every year that went by, until one day father and son were sitting on their own in an empty and fragmented home. He looked at his father and asked himself, what can I be to him? Inordinately little, he had to answer. Practically nothing. The woman he had loved since his youth was now dead and buried under a little grey stone covered in snow, unable to bring warmth to his old age. The fire on the hearth was on the point of dying out. He was the one that ought to light the new flame. This, he felt, was what old folk
were entitled to demand of the young in the normal course of life: to see the chain being continued, a new home, a grandchild to rock on their knee. That was Nature’s order of things: she endeavoured above all to cover up death with new, young life, as we ourselves cover the corpse with flowers, making it easier to approach annihilation; the road did indeed lead sharply downwards, but people travelled it with much play and babble, the way they started the journey. But he could not respond to this great yet simple demand. It was true that he could do various things: he did not believe there was any sort of beauty in the world that was unfamiliar to him, or any thought or nuance of thought that he could not follow; and, what was more, he could scrutinize the calculations of the State and draw caricatures in the margin and drink a considerable amount of whisky without losing his ability to reason, and perhaps do a few other trivial things as well. But he could not build a home. No potential, no thoughts in that direction. A craftsman or a labourer could do so, but not he. He could not conjure up the four thousand crowns a year that a poor middle-class family needed to live on. And even if he did get there one day, as well he might in the years ahead, then he would already be old, and his father dead, and she, his beloved - what would have become of her?
Admittedly he well knew that the old man made no such demands of him, at least not consciously. On the contrary, his father clearly understood how impossible it was. He had no hope of seeing his line continued, of being able to grow old surrounded by future promise and new shoots. But Martin realized that this very fact, the fact that he could not even hope, hung over him like a faint sorrow, making his twilight years even greyer and emptier. He had his fair share of troubles anyway. His daughter’s marriage had brought him scant joy. Her little boy was dead, and she had recently written a letter
home saying she wanted to separate from her husband.
---------The fire on the hearth is dying out. Who will light the new flame?
Papa went in to have his after-dinner nap.
It was five o’clock, and Martin got dressed to go and meet the woman who was expecting him. He put on evening dress, regardless of the fact that they would be alone and unobserved. He had promised her he would, since it was their anniversary.
IV
-----She was standing at the dressing table, where two thin candles were burning in front of the mirror. She had just arranged her abundant brown hair and, before she finished dressing, she ran her powder puff over her face to subdue the hottest flushes. He was sitting behind her in a corner of the settee, but their gazes met in the mirror and caught each other in a long smile. The wavering of the candle flames and the distance, which was increased by the mirror, made this smile mysterious and hazy. And away back in the murky depths behind the looking-glass, a green spark from the emerald on her finger was dancing.
“Will you be ready soon?” he asked. “It’s nearly half past seven. I’m worried in case we miss the ghost.”
They were going to see Hamlet.
She turned round and wiped him over the face with her powder puff, making him as white as a Pierrot.
“Silly Pierrette,” he said, wiping away the powder with her handkerchief, “don’t you see I’m pale enough already?”
She bent down, pressed his head to her bosom and kissed his hair.
“I’m so happy,” she whispered, “because it’s my anniversary today, and because I’m able to go to the theatre with you and sit in a little corner where nobody will see us.”
He gently caressed her hand. He felt a secret pang in his heart when he heard her talk like this, because he suspected and knew that, had there been any chance of it, she would much rather have sat with him in a seat where everyone could see
them. But he did not believe she had been thinking about this now. During the year that had gone by, she had never let any mention of marriage slip out, and she knew only too well anyway how impossible it was. But he himself could never stop feeling secretly ashamed of the fact that it was not in his power to give her the happiness that came from having a respectable and secure position and from not having to conceal anything from the world. He felt like this not because some notion of a duty to fulfil or a misdeed to be made good still lurked in a corner of his soul, but because he had grown immensely fond of her and would gladly have made life bright for her eye and smooth for her little feet, which had had to walk such stony paths that it was no wonder her shoes had eventually been trampled slightly out of shape.
But he cast these thoughts aside; he did not want to tempt the impossible, since he was not a strong man who could take her in his arms and force a way through for them both. And it had been her own choice. She had also known strong men, the sort of men of whom women say, “That’s what you call a real man”; and had she wanted to, she could have given her love to one of them, for they would not have scorned it. But her innermost instincts had held her back with predictions of unhappiness and shame. Because, strangely enough, those strong men are seldom the ones to act as he would have liked to act if he could; the very reason they are strong is that, when it comes down to it, their feelings are always allied to their own interests, and on the whole they can make better use of their strength. No, there was nothing they could do, these two lonely, frostbitten souls, other than gratefully warm themselves, without demanding the impossible, on the happiness that had fallen into their hands, and bless the day when they were first brought together by the voice in the blood that told them they suited each other and could make each other happy. In private, however, he often liked to
dwell on the remote dream of one day, many years hence, being able to give her a home. The thought that by then she would already be an old woman did not frighten him. He had a feeling that, no matter how time might fly, and even if she got wrinkles round the eyes and grey hairs, her young, white body would never grow old, but would always remain slim and young and warm as it was now; and no matter how the years might pass, with winter after winter snowing over his youth and piercing his soul and his thoughts with needles of ice, his heart would always warm to the beat of hers as it did now, and a spark of the sacred fire that warms all the world would always flare up when they came together.
While he was thinking all these thoughts, his eyes followed every movement of her slender white arms in front of the mirror, his smile again sought hers, she nodded to him, still with a gleam of secret happiness in her complexion beneath the powder, and away back in the gloom he saw his own face, its features sharpened by the candlelight to resemble a mask, nodding in reply like a Chinese doll.
“We’re in no hurry,” she said. “In any case, we daren’t creep into our little hidey-hole until the first act is well under way, otherwise we might meet somebody we know in the corridor.”
“No, you’re right,” he replied.
He had thought of that himself, anyway.
“You have to keep your wits about you when you’re in our situation,” she nodded, “it’s quite different from sitting with your nose in a book. But it’s almost like magic, isn’t it, to think that we’ve actually been left in peace for a whole year and nobody knows anything! I even think people are saying fewer bad things about me now than they used to. Everyone has become so friendly towards me: the accountant and the cashier and the girls in the office. But that’s perhaps because I’m
prettier than I was - am I not? They must see that I’m happy, and it puts them in a good mood and makes them behave kindly and nicely towards me without suspecting the reason. If they were to find out!...”
Martin did not like hearing her talk about her happiness. It was another thing to read it in her eyes and her complexion and to feel it in her kisses; he believed in it then, and there was no writing he would more gladly decipher than that. But when he heard her talk about it, he felt a weight of bitterness and depression on his chest at the thought of how little he had to give her in reality and how full of shortcomings and flaws her wretched happiness was, and he knew that the brief minutes she spent with him took on such a fervent colour for her precisely because she had to pay for them with long days and nights of anguish, worrying that she might suddenly lose what she had ventured so much to win, worrying that one day everything could suddenly be over, the gold of happiness withered leaves, and she herself lonelier and poorer than ever before. This anguish in fact never deserted her, and he knew it. Once, not long ago, they had arranged to meet each other at his place. The hour was drawing near, he was expecting her, there was a ring at the door and he hastened to open it; but it was not her, it was one of his friends, who had come to sit and talk for a while. He could not reply that he was busy or that he was expecting a visitor, because his friend would have met her on the stairs and realized everything; he instead said that he was just on his way out on an urgent errand, threw on his coat and hat, and they went off together. They had not got far beyond the doorway when he saw her coming up the street; she fixed him with a hesitant, frightened stare, and he greeted her in passing, politely and somewhat formally, as he had to greet her in order not to betray her. He turned into a side street to get rid of his friend, and after a few minutes he arrived back at his doorway by a
circuitous route. She was walking up and down outside, in the rain and the dirt. He pressed her hand gently and they went upstairs together. But when they got indoors, he saw that she was trembling with tears.
No explanations were needed, she had already understood the situation, but his curt, cool greeting as he passed by, talking to a strange gentleman, had been enough to force out the secret anguish in her blood; she had to have air, she had to cry, and she cried quietly in his arms for a long time.
Yes, their wretched happiness had given them a great deal, but it could not withstand the clear, dry illumination of words, it did not come off well from being spoken about. All his affection could not give her the sense of calm that a life that can be exhibited to the masses, and approved of by them, brings with it, nor could it prevent her from sometimes feeling shame and compunction when alone. For because life had shown her two different faces, between which she could see no connection, she had not one conscience, but two. One said to her that she had done the right thing, and that one day there would come a time when no-one would understand anymore why people used to shroud love between man and woman in shame and dirt and call it sin. But the other said nothing of the future; it arose from the depths of the past, it spoke with the voice of her dead mother, and with voices from back home in the woods and her childhood, when she knew nothing of the world or herself, when everything was so simple and you only needed to be good and all was well. In the evenings, when she had just left him and was sitting alone in her rented room with the strange, stupid furniture, of which the dressing table with its Empire mirror and green stone slab was the only thing belonging to her and reminding her of her childhood home, this old conscience would rise up and whisper lots of nasty things in her ear: it would whisper that the women who married repulsive men so that they
should be provided for and the poor girls who sold their bodies out of necessity were both better than she was; they at least had an excuse, but she had none. It was no use thinking about her great love and defending herself with that; the old conscience was very well informed, and would whisper in reply that he was not the one that had set her blood on fire, the flames had been fanned by her own desire, the evil lay within herself, and she was an outcast who ought to be lashed with birch twigs in the council chamber, as happened to loose women in former times. And the old conscience would find even worse things to whisper in her ear: it would whisper that the man she loved would soon grow tired of her, indeed, already had grown tired, and hated her in his heart because she was always so willing to sin and had never denied him anything.
He knew all this, since she always shared her worries with him. And he was always left wondering, astonished at this way of thinking: that the same desire which, for a man, was so natural and simple, and as easy to satisfy as hunger or thirst, should be, for a woman, a consuming shame that had to be suppressed or concealed - this way of thinking, which his emotions could never grasp, even if, on reflection, he traced it back to its origins in the mists of time when the woman was still the man’s property and anything sensual in her was permitted, indeed laudable, in so far as it expressed her submission to her owner’s will, but criminal and shameful if it proceeded of her own accord. This way of thinking was still so deeply rooted in the hearts of men that, in books or in real life, you seldom heard a man speak about the tender desires of a woman other than with mockery and ridicule, unless they applied to him and corresponded to his own desires, and often not even then. And it was still so firmly embedded in the minds of women that respectable women often felt privately ashamed of loving their husbands and longing for their embrace; indeed, he
remembered that he had once even heard a common prostitute divide her kind into ‘nice girls’ and ‘sluts’, by ‘nice girls’ meaning those who thought about payment and nothing else. In reality, this division was deeper and more real than she herself suspected; it had its roots in the female politics that had been passed down from one generation to the next over the centuries, as necessity had dictated from the beginning, the necessity that said not to devalue, through generosity and extravagance, the commodity that was the weaker party’s only means of power and the only thing that could save her from being completely crushed by the stronger party. And if the poor girl of pleasure had known her Bible a bit better, she could also have quoted in support of her categorization the prophet Ezekiel’s furious pronouncements over the wanton Aholah, who was unlike other harlots in that she scorned hire.
He understood all this very well; life was too mean for women to be able to be liberal, and he did not condemn any of them, not even the respectable ones. But he was fond of his generous ladyfriend and comforted her as best he could on those days when the conflicting voices within her had frightened her and filled her with anguish, which was not difficult for him, since when he was with her she felt no fear. But he knew also that there were days, weeks even, when she was consumed with anxiety that she might be pregnant, in spite of everything. He did not seek to deny to himself that this was the weak spot in all secret love affairs. He saw clearly how unfair the game becomes when it approaches this point, how all the risks and dangers in reality are on the part of the woman, and once again he felt secretly ashamed that it was not in his power to share the bitter things with her as he did the sweet ones. The risk of becoming pregnant was principally hers, and, even if it was avoided, the sense of loss and emptiness at not being able to allow herself the joy of motherhood was also hers. It cut him to the heart when,
one day at dusk, he saw her pick up a strange child off the street in her arms and kiss it. But for her, motherhood would have meant appalling misery, the way things were at the moment.
Neither of them had been spoilt by life, however; they had learned not to demand total, unblemished happiness, and their love had helped them to accept everything as it must and should be accepted.
She was ready now. She extinguished the candles in front of the mirror and waited a few minutes in the dark, while he went down the street ahead of her so that no-one should meet them together on the stairs. They sometimes risked walking together in the street after it got dark, especially if it was foggy, raining or snowing. And this evening the snow was falling so thick and white that no-one would have recognized them. People slid past them in the white night like nameless, indistinguishable shadows. Pressed up tightly to each other, themselves nameless, crude stereotypes, like the pairs of human silhouettes that children cut out of folded paper, they made their way through the snow. She was clasping his arm to her bosom, and they were both silent.
V
It was dark in the auditorium, and Martin had pushed up the shutters of the lattice. No-one could see them, and, from his seat in the corner, nor could he see anything of what was happening on stage; he simply heard verses and lines being declaimed into the darkness and saw, or imagined he could see, their effect on the curved rows of pale human masks in the stalls - a sloping flowerbed filled with large, strange flowers, colourless as plants become when they exist without sunlight, and not exactly beautiful as they gently moved, as if in an inaudible wind, or nodded on their stems every now and then.
He seemed to recognize all of them: either because he really had met them so often, against the backdrop of the streets and public places where he, like them, had a walk-on part, that their faces had lingered in his memory unbeknown to him; or because of the tendency of human faces to congregate in a small number of different types, so that you only rarely ever seem to meet a genuinely new face.
Besides, he knew a lot of these faces very well. That was Henrik Rissler over there, wasn’t it, his friend ever since his youth? They seldom saw each other nowadays, which was a pity, because Martin didn’t know anyone who understood friendship, thoughts and cigars as well as he did. But he had been married for a few years now and was constantly on the move. Martin had still not caught up with the newly-weds’ eternal odyssey from one damp flat to another, always far out on the fringes of town, from Vasastaden to Södermalm, from Södermalm to Kungsholmen. But Martin had a feeling that they
would rediscover each other’s company one day, if life would only give them both a bit more free time.
And there, a bit further down, that wrinkled little face, which resembled that of a child and also rather resembled that of an old man: wasn’t that an old schoolfriend too, wasn’t that Josef Marin? He never became a priest, which he was supposed to try to be to satisfy his obstinate old mother. But he never became entirely certain of his faith. For it is probably often the case with faith as it is with appetite, that it comes while you are eating; but he had never reached the stage where the real eating begins, and there was perhaps also a thirst for sincerity deep within him that made that particular career a bit too difficult. Now he wrote reviews of music hall and funerals for a leading newspaper. He wrote what he thought, without pulling any punches, taking pains to think the way he believed the editor thought; and the editor, who was an old devil and thought what he liked, made it his business to think the way he imagined educated and wealthy people generally thought. And because these principles had always been the guiding ones for the newspaper, it had become popular, respected and very long-established, having acquired a well-founded reputation for its uncompromising honesty and impartial devotion to truth.
“Actually I could just as easily have been a priest,” he had said to Martin one day, a little sadly, when they exchanged a few words with each other on a street corner.
...And there, in the centre up there at the back, that pale, thin woman: wasn’t that Harriet Skotte, the girl for whom he had burned with passion on a few spring evenings many years ago? He was sure he had written her a letter too, which was never sent. Yes, back then... Life had certainly treated her rather badly since, for she did not look happy. She was married now, and her husband was sitting beside her. He was stout, very well dressed and looked as if he had been varnished. Poor child,
she doesn’t have a very good life with her lawful husband, you can tell that just by looking at him...
He saw other faces too, women that he knew slightly though they did not know him, young women that he held in fond remembrance because they had once, without knowing it, made him a trifle richer and happier by floating past him in the street like clouds on which the sun was shining... Down there sat one that he recognized very well because she had once noticed his gaze, and had gathered up her skirts and given him such a look that he might as well have been a murderer in the same mould as Jack the Ripper. Poor little lady, time flies, she is no longer young; she was already at the end of her flowering season then, and now she probably no longer attracts such glances as she walks down Sturegatan...
He was tired of listening to one thing and looking at another. The strange, profound old words that echoed from the stage meant nothing to him at this moment, and he got the impression from the masks down there in the stalls that the words were rebounding unheard off them too, and that they scarcely understood what was happening on stage, apart from the bits that were pure pantomime. They were already into the fifth act; he lay back in his comer, letting the two gravediggers bandy jests and skulls around as they liked best, and sought his friend’s eye in the dark. But he could not catch it, because she could see everything from where she was sitting and did not take her eyes off the stage. And the words again took on colour and life in his ears when he saw the excitement in her face, and he seemed to see the whole of tins churchyard scene, which he could not see but knew so well, reflected in her gaze. He saw Hamlet standing there, cloaked in night and enigma, with Yorick’s skull in his hand; he saw the funeral procession, the coffin being lowered, and the Queen
scattering flowers in the grave: sweets to the sweet. He saw the strange scene in the grave, the two men grappling down there, and he heard Hamlet’s voice: “I loved Ophelia!”
What does he want, does he want to tear her out of the grave? If she were not dead, if she got up out of the coffin now, rosy-cheeked and wide awake as if after a peaceful sleep, would he then take her in his arms, carry her off and love her for ever and a day? No, that is not what he means. Even while she was still alive, he said to her on one occasion, “I did love you once.” But he was no ordinary fickle cavalier, he had not forgotten her in favour of another lady at court with a smaller waist and bigger breasts, and yet he could say, “I did love you once.” He might have said that about a lot of things. He had also loved the sun, the flowers and the trees. He had loved the blue air, and water and fire and the good earth. He had loved all this, he could have said to all the four elements and to life itself, “I did love you once. ” But tilings had changed since then, something had come between all this and him, something that took him into its power without his leave and pushed everything else aside, the sun and the flowers and the women and the woman, right out of the way, so that he could barely see it anymore, except as if through a haze... And now, when he saw the funeral procession approaching and heard that the deceased was the girl he had loved, he suddenly remembered what he had possessed and lost, but he also knew that he had lost her and everything else long before she died, and even the loss itself seemed real to him only in the first instant, the next moment he was looking at that too from afar, through a haze...
---------Martin had closed his eyes, and when he opened them again he himself saw everything as if through a haze: the stalls and the white masks down there, and his beloved. She took hold of his hand, caressed it gently between her two warm hands and whispered to him:
“Tell me what you’re thinking about.”
VI
The winter night slept all around them. It was no longer snowing; they were walking home through the snowdrifts in a white moonlit fog, in through her doorway and up the stairs. The higher they climbed, the lighter it grew. They stopped at a window on the stairs in the middle of a pool of moonlight and looked out. Most of the fog was beneath them now, wrapped around the yards and the building sites down below, but the layers of air above were virtually clear, bluish and bright like an August night. There was a wide halo round the moon, and in the pale light the world lay as if frozen and turned to stone. A single windowless gable-end wall rose out of the sea of fog below, drawing the moon’s cold gaze towards it and staring back blind and empty. A shiver ran through them both, they pressed up close to each other with their eyes shut, and everything vanished for them in a kiss. It was a long, strange kiss. He felt the whole of his being dissolve, and in his ears he heard the ringing of distant bells as if from a little country church far away among pastures and cornfields. It was like a Sunday morning; he saw a square of raked sand, the peonies shone red from the flowerbeds, white and yellow butterflies fluttered round the bushes and the lawns, and he heard the rustling of great trees. He was walking with her through the trees, but there was already a breath of autumn in the sighing of the treetops, the yellow butterflies were yellow leaves, and some were already black with frost. The wind carried with it disjointed strains and words, sometimes resembling dry everyday words, sometimes furtive whisperings about
something that has to be kept secret, and mixed itself in all this like an echo of the actor’s strange tone of voice just now when he said, “I loved Ophelia! ” But he did not let go of her mouth, they sank deeper and deeper into each other, he seemed to be travelling through space, a red star blazed through the white moonlit fog, at first dull and fading, then brighter and ever nearer, it grew and widened into a flaming fountain of fire, and he stuck fast to it with his lips. And he seemed to be burning up without pain, the flames refreshed his tongue like a sour wine, and he seemed to imbibe everything from this fountain: satisfaction and hunger, thirst and refreshment, the cheer of the sun and the anguish of the dark, the clear thoughts of day and the moonstruck brooding of night, all the joy and misery of the world.