The Parson’s Cows
For ten years I had not seen my old friend from student days, Pastor Torelius of Lerkila, when one fine warm summer evening recently we bumped into each other on the pavement outside the Grand Hotel. We had been in the same dining set at Uppsala. I no longer recall exactly what I had been reading for at the time - probably the preliminary exam - but he had been preparing for Finals and he was a very serious young man, except on Saturday evenings. For he had regular habits and he was punctual in all things, including the matter of youthful high spirits. He also had a good brain, and since he was of good, old clerical stock and had more than one bishop, if not as an uncle then at least as a family friend, he had made rapid progress and though he was still a young man he already had quite a good parish. All this had given him an essentially bright, harmonious conception of Christianity, and when I now saw him coming towards me on the pavement with open arms as if it had been hardly a week since we parted outside Taddis’ café, I might well have thought from his expression that it was Saturday evening if I had not known that it was Friday.
We sat down at a table under the big awning of the Grand’s restaurant and took various refreshments. We came to the end of our old memories of student days sooner than we had really expected, and so we conversed mostly about the present. I learned that he had already re-married and that his second marriage promised to be just as happy as the first would have been, had the Lord so wished. He talked about the pleasures of living in the country, which he would not exchange for anything in the world. He liked his parishioners and he believed they also thought well of him. We also touched upon present-day religious movements and I asked him, among other things, whether he was having a lot of trouble with evangelicals among his parishioners.
‘You mean the dissenters?’ he said. ‘No, I can’t say I have much trouble. I must admit, though, that they caused me some concern to start with. It was galling when the archbishop came on his visitation and saw that more people were streaming into the meeting-house than into the church. But I was new to the place, my predecessor had to wear the sack-cloth and ashes, and things have improved since then. There is a more tolerant atmosphere now, and although I can’t really say I have any more people in the church than before, at least there are not so many in the meeting-house, thank God! - Well, actually there are special reasons for that...’
He broke off and looked rather mysterious, but I questioned him no further and we sat quietly for a minute. On the pavement before us an occasional thin American walked among the fat Stockholmers, across from the Strömparterre came the last notes of a Viennese song, which left a strange silence after it, and through this silence came the mooing of a cow. It came from one of the skerry boats which had just tied up at the waterfront; a moment later the cow could be heard tramping across the gang-plank, another cow followed, and then we saw a little old peasant go by, leading both cows behind him by a rope.
‘Those are fine cows,’ said the parson, ‘though not as good as mine. I have the fattest and best-looking cows in the whole parish. But you have to see cows in green surroundings to understand them. There is nothing I care for more dearly than my cows - of the things of this world, of course. But for that, too, there are...’
‘Special reasons?’
‘Precisely. Permit me to tell you the whole story, about the cows and the dissenters and my marriage. It all belongs together.
‘It was like this:
‘Perhaps you remember that it was very hot last year, especially just before midsummer. One day I took a walk around my property, as usual. I went along the path beside the ditches in the full blaze of the sun, I crossed a meadow where my people were cutting the hay and I came to the pasture where my cows were grazing. You can’t imagine how beautiful they looked there among the birch trees! I scratched their heads and talked to them as I always do, to May Rose and Buttercup and White Maid - she is my bell-cow, she has no horns and is milk-white - and to Hercules my bull, who is a combination of strength and gentleness. Bulls are the most good-natured of all animals as long as one doesn’t irritate them in the first place. I spoke to all of them and they answered me as well as they could and they mooed after me when I left them. I also talked to a born-again tailor whom I met at the bottom of the hill and who was a great light among those people in my parish who had been saved. I have even heard it said that he used to exorcise devils. Well, he gave me a sweet and sour answer, of course, and then I went on down to the lake. It was shining and still. Actually, it is my regular practice never to bathe before midsummer; but that was only a few days away, and I was perspiring with the heat. I couldn’t resist it. In the twinkling of an eye my clothes were off, I jumped into the water and swam out. But it was colder than I had expected, and I did not stay in the water for long.
‘As I came out I saw all my cows coming towards me. I called them, and they came nearer, but slowly and cautiously. White Maid in the lead, with Hercules close beside her. When they were about ten or fifteen yards away I suddenly realized by their expression that they did not recognize me, indeed they would not even recognize that I was a human being. And in Hercules’ eyes I thought I could see something I had never seen there before. I have to admit that all of a sudden I began to shake with fear. And if you would like to know the meaning of such panic-stricken fear, then place yourself stark naked in front of a dozen great beasts with sharp horns - for I have eleven cows and a bull - with the lake behind you!
‘I for my part became half crazy with fear and started to run along the bank. Now the cows came to life! I heard them coming up behind me at a brisk trot. What could I do? I grabbed hold of a bough of a tree, which happened to be fairly low, and pulled myself up. And not too soon, for the whole herd was already round me, and Hercules snorted at me and butted at the tree with his horns. Well, at least I was out of his reach and it was so hot that I didn’t catch a chill, though I am usually very sensitive to cold around the stomach. I tried to reason with the animals, but it simply was not possible. White Maid responded only with contempt, May Rose gave me an angry look, and Hercules was quite beside himself. And in a way they were quite right. How could they imagine that this strange white animal that at the sight of them took fright and climbed up a tree, and had no black clothes, no spectacles and no wide-brimmed straw hat, was identical with their good friend and master? He must, of course, be their enemy, or at any rate an alien, ridiculous, improper phenomenon which they ought to attack.
‘Fortunately, however, violent emotions seldom last long, at least not among cows. After a while the rich grass at their feet began to attract their attention, and I hid myself as far as possible in the branches of the tree in the hope that they would forget me. The animals began to spread out and I had hopes of escaping - the rough bark was hurting my skin - when I heard the voices of girls, laughing and chattering. The schoolmistress and both daughters of the born-again tailor - all three of them saved, of course - were coming down to the lake with towels to bathe! “Now the very devil is loose!” I thought to myself. I only hoped they would not see me, and I resolved in return to keep my eyes turned towards the land. Well, there wasn’t much to look at anyway, apart from the youngest. They were so quick with their movements that I scarcely had time to consider what I should do before the youngest of the girls was standing with one foot in the water and with all her clothes laid neatly and tidily upon a rock. To be honest, I didn’t dare turn my head for fear of making the leaves rustle. Well, the girls were soon
splashing in the water all three of them, and I sat as quiet as a mouse in my tree. One gets used to all sorts of things; the bark no longer hurt my poor skin as much as it had done, and I started to accept my situation and hope for a happy ending to the story. And so there was in the end, but not exactly the way I had thought.
‘The girls came back out of the water, but the schoolmistress happened to go a little further away from the shore, naturally just where my clothes were lying. She came running back to report her find: “There’s a man’s clothes over there, a man must be bathing right next to us - but where has he gone, he must have swum a long way out!” They put on their clothes with feverish haste, they stood and listened. Nothing could be heard, and nothing was to be seen in the lake. Had he been drowned? And who could it be? They would have to inspect the clothes more carefully. The youngest was the boldest, she went to look and she returned to report: “It’s the parson! What if he has drowned?” “What will become of his poor soul?” wondered the schoolmistress. “Oh, be quiet about his soul,” retorted the youngest, crossly with a lump in her throat, “I went to confirmation classes with him three years ago and I really liked him, even though he didn’t have the true faith. But I don’t suppose God is as spiteful as you are.”
‘All at once they were silent and they stared up into the tree, as if spellbound. Then three screams in chorus, and the next moment they were gone like the wind.
‘At last, I came down from the tree and got dressed. I was comparatively calm. And you must admit, I had little more to lose. Never has a poor servant of God found himself quite innocently in such a disastrous situation! It was not long before the tailor arrived with two more of the faithful. They looked pretty black all three, but in the tailor’s eyes there shone something of a secret fire. You can imagine that scoundrel’s delight at the prospect of exorcising the devil from none other than the lawful custodian of his soul, the parish priest! Fortunately, however, I had already put on my clothes, and with them the dignity which I now so badly needed. Before the tailor had time to open his mouth I told him that I would pay him a visit that afternoon and give him a full explanation, whereupon I took my leave of them with a wave of my hand and went on my way with firm composure.
‘In the afternoon 1 had the good fortune to meet the girl first. I found her by a bush in the garden eating gooseberries. Her father, you see, had a nice cottage with a pleasant garden; with worldly goods, too, he had been blessed, and he had saved up and bought this cottage. I explained everything to her and the sweet child believed me at once. She was the only sensible one among them. First of all she had thought I had gone mad, since I had climbed up into a tree stark naked; but now that she heard me talk and could see that I still had possession of my senses, she believed me at once. She was a simple, unaffected girl, and what had happened did not seem to her nearly so dreadful as I had feared. It is true, as somebody once said, that women are closer to nature than men, and they feel less shame over natural things than we do, even though we always believe the opposite when we are young and do not know them.’
‘But what about the tailor?’
‘He never believed me. But that, of course, did not prevent him from being flattered when I courted his daughter a few months later. You will have gathered by now that she is the girl who is now my wife. But my father-in-law still believes that I climbed up naked into a tree to watch the girls bathing. For the sake of the family, however, he regards this sin as a very natural and pardonable manifestation of human weakness which I have since thoroughly atoned for. But some of his fellow believers regard his indulgence towards me with surprise and displeasure, and that is why the prayer-meetings, which he and his family conduct, are no longer so well attended as they used to be.’
It was getting late and we prepared to leave. As we parted we shook hands warmly and I wished him all good fortune for the victory of the true church and congratulated him on the happy turn which events had taken for him personally.
‘Thank you,’ he said. T am fortunate already. It is true, of
course, that my wife does not have the same kind of education as I have; but her heart is educated. And it also made an impression upon me that she laid out her clothes so neatly, while the others threw theirs all over the place.’