Rugg
It is Sunday morning, and as I step out on to the porch I see the front drive before me, the gravel freshly raked. The cockerel, perched up on one of the gateposts, stretches his red comb high up into the sky and crows solemnly, three times. Down below the hens strut about, clucking to all their little chickens and teaching them godliness, morality and a modest, unassuming manner. On the other gatepost the cat sits with his tail wrapped round him. His eyes with their knife blade pupils follow the flight of the birds over the tops of the pine trees; but he does not allow them to disturb his peace of mind, for he has learnt not to desire the unattainable. He has drawn a circle round himself with his tail and he cares nothing for the vanity and noise of the world outside. Anyway, the noise doesn't amount to much now on a Sunday morning; the cock has stopped crowing, satisfied with the traditional three calls; only the cow-bells are still heard from the slope over the road, and the pigs as they practise their French down in the sty: neuf-neuf, oui-oui.
But right in the middle of the drive lies the grey, shaggy, utterly nondescript dog Rugg. When he hears me coming out on to the porch, he lifts up his head, pricks his ears and watches me with two sparkling brown eyes; and only after I have called him by name: - ‘Rugg!’ - and snapped my fingers a little as a sign that I would like to talk with him, does he get up, stretch himself with a long yawn and come towards me, amiably wafting his tail. But this waft of tail is neither ingratiating nor particularly enthusiastic; it is something more than a mere formality, but not exactly an outburst of emotion. It is calculated to fit his estimate of my importance and my position in the household. For I am not his master, but his master’s friend and for that reason I am also a friend of his.
‘Rugg,’ I say to him, ‘just what kind of dog are you really? Your master says you are a damned mongrel; but since I am a guest in this house I will be polite to you and call you a dream dog. Your long body and short legs reveal that you are related to next door’s wicked old dachshund. That rough coat has been handed down from some terrier or other among your ancestors on your mother’s side; but your deceased mother was not a terrier herself -1 knew her quite well and I still remember her cheerful bark when in the old days she used to come to meet me down by the crossroads; she was more like a poodle. But you yourself, Rugg, what are you like? Would you fancy trying to pass yourself off as one of those Dandie-Dinmonts that Walter Scott made fashionable in his country in his day; you are in fact faintly reminiscent of them from a distance.’
‘No,’ replies Rugg, ‘don’t try to tickle my vanity. I am glad I don’t have any pedigree, and I don’t see what’s so special about being tied up howling for a whole week at a time at dog shows. I can do my job just as well without any medals. I guard my master’s house and property, and my bark is deeper and stronger than the yapping of the little village mongrels round here, and that keeps the tramps away. And last autumn I killed a fox.’
‘Cock-a-doodle!’ says the cockerel on the gate-post to confirm the point.
And that is perfectly true: Rugg killed a fox, even though he looks so small and unimportant; and he saved the cock. I remember the occasion; it happened last autumn and I witnessed his exploit myself. I was a guest in the house at that time, as I am now. We had heard the fox first the previous evening when we were sitting at the table talking, while the wind whistled at the windows and Rugg lay on his mat by the door sleeping with one eye open. All at once he became restless and started growling and yapping, and then suddenly he leapt up wildly, barked like one possessed and jumped up at the door to get out. He paused at intervals to listen, with his ears pricked and his coat bristling. We too listened to the strange sound which the wind was carrying
with it from the woods. It was the fox, who was sitting at the edge of the forest complaining about the bad times, for he had noticed that the hens were secured for the night. He sounded like a dog that was trying to bark but couldn't do it properly because he had a bad cold.
‘Don’t let him get out,’ the lady of the house said, ‘the fox will have him!’
‘No,’ said my friend, our host, ‘Rugg is not big enough to fight the fox.’
Rugg had to stay indoors. It didn’t help even when, with the foxiest of looks in his brown eyes, he lifted one leg against the wall in the hope of being chased out. That was an old worn-out trick and it was seen through at once. He got a smack from his master, crept under the table and forgot about needing to go out.
But the next day he took his revenge. We were playing croquet on the lawn in perfect peace when suddenly there was a dreadful hullabaloo in the back yard. Rugg was barking and the hens were cackling as if the Day of Judgment had come. ‘The fox!’ we all cried at once and rushed to the theatre of war with our croquet mallets raised up ready to strike. Naturally, the fox had made himself invisible at once; the hens were counted and found to be complete, and the cock had flown up on to a chestnut tree. He stayed up there for best part of an hour. Terror had suddenly taught him how to fly, but once he was safe he had forgotten that difficult art. Long after peace had been restored he remained sitting up there, measuring with his eyes the fearful distance down to the ground and cackling in embarrassment. In the end he had to be got down with a ladder. And only then did we see that he had lost a couple of his finest tail feathers. But where was Rugg? Rugg was gone. There was no point in whistling and calling; he had run off into the woods after the fox.
The lady of the house was disconsolate.
‘Now the fox will get my little Rugg,’ she said. T shall never see him again!'
For her the fox was a terrible wild beast.
I did my best to console her.
‘Never give up hope that right will triumph,’ I said to her. T
know that Rugg is smaller than the fox; but he has more courage, and the feeling that he is carrying out his proper duty will make him strong. The fox on the other hand has a bad conscience, like Solness the builder in Ibsen’s play.’
‘That dog will look after himself,’ said Rugg’s master. ‘His father’s a dachshund!’
As we left the table after lunch Rugg came home from the woods. He had his tail in the air, his eyes were alight, and in his teeth he was carrying the fox’s tail.
We stared in astonishment at each other and at Rugg. Had he really killed the fox, or had the fox given up his tail to save his life?
Rugg gave us a clear answer. Still with the tail in his teeth - it was no good trying to coax him to give it up - he set off towards the wood, but then stopped, put down the tail for a moment and barked sharp and clear.
‘Come along!’ he said.
We followed him and he showed us the way. Deep in the wood we found the fox, dead, bitten in the throat and the belly.
‘That is a dachshund’s bite,’ said Rugg’s master. ‘But he must be a young fox. An older one would never have let himself be killed like that.’
He was a very young and very beautiful fox, red and white as a young fox should be. His legs and paws still had something of the pup’s cheerful clumsiness. There was something innocent about him as he lay there: he had not had a long life, a long career of sinful adventures that might have left some dirty grey streak in his coat. We resolved to forgive him his criminal desire for the cock and to send his coat to the furrier to have a mat made out of it.
‘Yes, Rugg,’ I say to the dog when we have gone through this episode together in our memory, ‘that was your great day, Rugg, and you are a remarkable dog.’
And it is true, the more I think of Rugg and his like, the more
1 have to admire them. But when I examine properly my feeling for dogs and get to the bottom of it, I soon find that what I really admire most in them is my own nature, human nature. All our domestic animals, the cock up there on his gatepost and the cat on his, the cow in the paddock and the pig in the sty, all of them are to some extent our own work, the work of man. We have changed them all a little, toned down one quality and sharpened another; we have modified them to suit our requirements. But out of the wolf and the jackal we created something quite new when we made them into dogs, something whose like scarcely existed in all creation before us. No, in the case of the dog we were not satisfied with modifications; we changed him altogether, we made him the very opposite of what he had been before, taught him to hate his own flesh and blood and ally himself to man, his mortal enemy. In this world, where everything was hostile to us from the start, only the dog has learnt to see things from our point of view and to measure by our standards, to regard as good that which suits us and treat as evil that which is our enemy. The other animals which we have brought under our control serve us without knowing or wanting to. The cat catches rats entirely for his own pleasure, and he has never understood why those strange human beings praise him for catching a rat but beat him when he comes along with a heart full of innocence and a little bird in his teeth. He has given up pondering over the problem and does as he pleases anyway. The hen doesn’t lay her eggs so that we can have French omelettes, the sheep doesn’t offer us his wool as a tribute that he owes us, the cow may moo because she wants to be milked, but that is only because the pressure makes her uncomfortable. Only the dog has made it his pleasure and his highest endeavour to serve us willingly and knowingly.
Dogs have a religion and their god is mankind. And of all the world’s worshippers the dog is probably the most decidedly monotheistic. He must have one master. I remember hearing about a guard dog who didn’t know his master, because his master didn’t bother about him. He was a hunter, the master; he kept beagles and greyhounds and despised the little black lump of a dog that guarded his house. But this dog chose himself
instead a master of his own; he chose an old labourer, the oldest of them all, the one who had been longest on the estate. He attached himself to him, he obeyed no-one but him and followed him about whenever he was not tied up.
But precisely because man has created the dog in his own image I should find it just as difficult to say in general that I like dogs as to say that I do not like them. There is a sect among the Muslims of al-Kahira who regard as unclean those of their number upon whom in the course of the day the shadow of a dog has fallen. On Mäster Samuelsgatan in Stockholm there lives a middle-aged spinster who says her prayers every night together with her Moppe and shares not only her bed with him but also her toothbrush; and her heart would open itself in the same way for every Moppe in the world if only she could afford to pay for all the dog licences. The love of the Chinaman for his dogs steers a healthy middle course between these two extremes: he eats them.
And I for my part also steer a middle way, though rather differently ; I like dogs in much the same way as I like people, that is, with discrimination. Among dogs, as among people, there are geniuses and idiots, enthusiasts and philistines, philanthropists and bom criminals. Among the dogs I have known personally 1 have met both clowns and serious folk, and I also recall one or two hypocrites who put on the mask of tragedy to hide a shallow soul. And dogs are like people also in another respect, namely that it is only possible to like them as individuals. Collectively they are almost always repulsive - just like people. If I am out walking along a pleasant path thinking about the ways of the world and I hear in the distance the noise of a rich landowner’s dogs, I prefer to turn round and take another path. And I cannot deny that my love for animals cools down each time I see the vulgar rabble of big town dogs wildly pursuing a little bitch in full gallop across parks and plants, lawns and flower-beds.
However, the dog, as we now know him, is our own work, and there is hardly any vice or sin we could fairly blame him for in which we did not precede him and set an example. Also it is only by living together continuously with man that the canine race
keeps going; we can safely prophesy that he will not survive us very long when the day comes for the fires to die out in our hearths and for our homes to fall into ruin. The little breeds will disappear, the big ones will forget what we taught them and become again what they were long ago, before they met us. And when no human voice any longer calls a dog, the dog also will have forgotten his language, and his old cheerful bark will be indistinguishable from the hungry howl of the wolf and the idiotic screech of the jackal.
The old story of the dog who laid himself down to die on his master’s grave is a very clear symbol of the whole race’s relationship to us humans, who have acquired from among our brother animals so many servants, but only one friend.