The Kiss
Once upon a time there was a young girl and a very young man. They were sitting on a rock on a spit of land sticking out into the sea and the waves lapped right up to their feet. They sat silently, each of them wrapped in thought, and they watched the sun go down.
He was thinking that he would very much like to kiss her. As he looked at her lips it seemed to him that this was precisely what they were meant for. He had, of course, seen prettier girls and actually he was in love with another, but he would surely never be able to kiss the other girl because she was an ideal, a star, and ‘die Sterne, die begehrt man nicht’.
She was thinking that she would very much like him to kiss her so that she would have an opportunity to be really angry with him and show how deeply she despised him. She would stand up, draw her skirts tightly round her, give him a look charged with ice-cold disdain and strut off, erect and calm and with no unnecessary haste. But so that he should not guess what she was thinking she said in a low, soft voice:
‘Do you think there is another life after this one?’
He thought it would be easier to kiss her if he said yes. But he could not quite remember what he might have said on the subject on other occasions and he was afraid of contradicting himself. And so he looked deep into her eyes and said:
‘There are times when I believe there is.’
This answer pleased her exceedingly well and she thought: I
like his hair, anyway - and his forehead, too. But it is a pity his nose is so ugly and he has no position - just a student reading for his exams. Not the sort of boy she could aggravate her friends with.
He thought: Now surely I can kiss her. But he was dreadfully frightened all the same, for he had never kissed a girl of good family and he wondered whether it was dangerous. Her father was lying asleep in a hammock not far off and he was mayor of the town.
She thought: Perhaps it would be better still if I were to box him on the ears when he kisses me.
And then she thought again: Why doesn’t he kiss me? Am I so ugly and repulsive?
And she bent forward over the water to look at her reflection, but her image was broken by the splashing waves.
Her train of thought continued: I wonder what it will feel like when he kisses me. Actually, she had only been kissed once, and that was by a lieutenant after a ball in the town hotel. But he smelt so badly of punch and cigars, and though she had been rather flattered at being kissed by him since he was, after all, a lieutenant, she still felt that that kiss didnt amount to very much. Furthermore, she hated him because he had not courted her afterwards or indeed paid any attention to her at all.
And as they sat thus, each of them wrapped in private sthoughts, the sun went down and it became dark.
And he thought: Since she is still sitting by my side, even though the sun has gone down and it has become dusk, it may well be that she would not very much object if I kissed her.
And gently he put his arm around her neck.
She had not reckoned with this at all. She had thought that he would quite simply kiss her and then she would give him a box on the ears and strut off like a princess. But now she didn’t know what to do. She wanted to be angry with him, of course, but she also didn’t want to lose the kiss. And so she sat absolutely still.
Then he kissed her.
It felt much stranger than she had thought; she felt herself
going weak and pale and she had quite forgotten that she was to give him a box on the ears and that he was only a student reading for his exams.
But he thought of a passage in a book by a religious doctor on The Sex Life of Woman where it said: ‘One must take care that the marital embrace does not become dominated by sensual lust.’ And he thought this must be extremely hard, since even a kiss could do so much.
*
When the moon came up they were still sitting there kissing.
She whispered into his ear:
‘I loved you from the first moment I saw you.’
And he replied:
‘For me there has never been anyone in the world but you.’