After Dinner
The little green room was in semi-darkness between the lounge, which was bright with the electric light, and the dark smoking room, which was lit only by a single green lamp that stood on the open lid of the secretaire. In the lounge a distinguished opera singer was singing ‘Quando cadran le foglie’. In the smoking room the host sat with an intimate circle of gentlemen by the secretaire, its bright mahogany surface reflecting the green triangle of the lampshade, showing them his celebrated collection of photographs taken from nature, from which it appeared that nature is at times unnatural. In the little green room a pale gentleman and a lady dressed in red sat whispering in a comer, three old ladies sat on the sofa nodding their heads, and in a gilded armchair there dozed a thin little white-haired professor who had been emeritus for a generation. Through the half-open doors of the balcony the February air blew in, refreshing and yet strangely mild, and in the doorway there stood a young girl in white.
The hostess walked across the room:
‘You’re not cold, are you?’ she said. ‘Professor, have you ever in all your years known such weather at the beginning of February?’
‘My dear lady,’ the old man said as he opened one eye a little (the other eyelid no longer responded), I have such a bad memory for weather. I don’t remember anything about the weather years ago unless it is part of some special association of ideas. In ’48, for example. I remember very well what it was like the day the February revolution broke out - how mild the air seemed, and how the sun was shining on the houses across the
street - I was sitting outside a café on the Boulevard des Capucines - ’
‘Darling, you do make yourself so ridiculous with your indecent photographs,’ said the hostess as she stuck a frowning nose into the gentlemen’s room. ‘Ah, music, music! Is there anything in the world that can be compared with music, professor?’
‘I don’t know. Well, perhaps - the source from which it comes. The common source that gives rise to that gentleman’s lovely song and your husband’s nasty photographs.’
The Consul General’s wife continued to smile engagingly with her lips, but her eyes stared like the eyes of an idiot. When the professor noticed it he closed the other eye as well.
‘Love, madame.’
‘The Swedes,’ he added, ‘have acquired a reputation for loving music and hating ideas. For my part I, alas, am quite unmusical.’
A bald-headed gentleman came in from the hall. He was a prominent politician and a member of the First Chamber.
‘What news from the Senate?’ asked the hostess.
‘Great news, my dear cousin. The world is making such progress that it is a joy to behold. After our resolution today we have reached the point where we can all hang ourselves whenever we like and still get a decent burial. Can you resist the temptation?’
The host came up to the doorway and shook hands with the senator:
‘Well, how was the debate? Were there any good points?’
‘Not really. The minority rallied behind the slogan: the church grieves. One or two of them were on the point of tears. But the bishop was shaking with fury when he had to expound the church’s grief. He has a violent nature, the bishop.’
The three old ladies looked around the room, bewildered and alarmed:
‘Is it really possible,’ said the one in the middle, ‘that the First Chamber is advocating suicide?’
‘Oh no, far from it... The Chamber was of course agreed that
suicide is always immoral. The minister of justice made that point very strongly.’
‘The bishop,’ said the old professor, ‘seems to lack a sense of history. The idea that the church expresses its grief over suicide by burial in silence is quite unhistorical. At one time the church said to the grieving widow: your husband is in hell; obey me, or you will go there too! That is what the church always said, as long as she could and dared and was allowed to say it. And she would still say that today if it were left to her. But that was in the church’s days of power, when she could afford to be honest. Nowadays she has to try to keep up with the times. Yes, yes, it can be hard for us old folk sometimes.’
‘Oh, professor,’ smiled the hostess sweetly, ‘you seem to have kept up to date anyway, in spite of your age.’
T don’t have anything to do,’ said the professor, ‘and so I have time to think. And if I had been in the Chamber, I think that as a curiosity I would have given them a little speech in defence of suicide.’
The girl in white turned round in surprise:
‘As a curiosity? Grandfather - do you not always mean what you say?’
‘Oh yes, my child. But there are opinions which it is best not to express except as curiosities.’
‘My dear, dear professor,’ the hostess’s eyes had once again acquired that staring expression which made the old man close his eyes, ‘you surely don’t mean that we should all go and kill ourselves?’
‘No, lady, we should not - at least, you should not. I only support those suicides which actually take place. And I consider that the great majority of suicides are relatively good and proper acts. I think suicide is nearly always the best thing that the person concerned can do under the given circumstances, and in most cases it would be far more criminal of him to go on living. You see, nature has taken good care to focus our will on the preservation of our life for as long as it can have the slightest value for ourselves or others, indeed often for much, much longer. And in the end it is surely for the individual himself and nobody else to decide whether he ought to live or die. In old Massilia there was a strange law: anyone who wished to die had to present his reasons to the Senate, and if the Senate considered his grounds sufficient, then they gave him a painless poison - cigué I think it was called. To attempt suicide in any other way carried the death penalty. What business that was of the Senate’s I do not understand: but the poison was good. The fact is that only in a very few quite exceptional cases does society or any group of individuals really suffer as a result of somebody’s suicide - when people think otherwise, that is because they confuse the sort of conduct which commonly leads to suicide with the act itself, and they make a perhaps quite justified condemnation of the man’s way of life into a quite unjustified condemnation of his way of death. It is easy to say: “he should have reformed, he should have started a new life, he should have made good what he did wrong.” But that is usually not possible. For a man who has been helping himself from the till and knows he is going to be found out it is quite impossible. It is not possible for him either to feed his family or to pay off his debt by sitting in jail, and when he comes out he will be a burden to his nearest and dearest instead of a support. He is quite right to kill himself, and if he has any decency left that is what he will do. And in a thousand other cases as well that “new life” is just as impossible for him to achieve. The man who wants to die is always sick, it may be in his body, or his mind, or his will or his character. And if the will to die prevails over the will to live then that is because his sickness was a mortal sickness. He then has a right to die. It may even be his duty - his duty towards life and those who live on.’
It was silent in the room. Gradually people had come to realize that the old man was serious. ‘Yes,’ said the senator, standing with his back to the fire and his hand inside his waistcoat, ‘yes, from a purely heathen point of view I admit that I can’t find any fault in the professor’s line of argument. But the professor is forgetting that we live in a Christian society.’
‘There is some reason to doubt that,’ replied the professor with a smile that revealed an excellent set of false teeth. ‘But I can gladly pretend it is true. And then I shall take the liberty of reminding you that the superstitious horror with which popular religion regards suicide has no foundation whatever either in the Christian religion which Jesus taught or in that which is preached nowadays in our churches. It is founded entirely upon a quite unique and very curious view of religion, which has long since been abandoned by all educated people and by most uneducated people as well - indeed, all but forgotten: that is, the idea that a man’s fate in the next life depends most of all upon the more or less proper manner in which he departs this life.’
‘Well, isn’t that strange,’ cried the old ladies on the sofa in chorus, ‘but at least it says in the catechism that suicide...’
‘Yes,’ said the professor, ‘it would indeed be useful to have a copy of the catechism to hand. I don’t know the Bible by heart; but if there really is any passage in it that expressly condemns suicide, then I expect we will find it quoted in the catechism. Perhaps you have a copy of the catechism in your library, Consul General?’
Our host, the affable Consul General, immediately pressed a button on the wall. A smart servant-girl in a black dress with a white pinafore appeared in the doorway.
‘Would you mind going to the bookshop on the comer, Hanna, and buying a copy of Dr Martin Luther’s little catechism, please?’
‘Hm,’ said the old bank manager Israel, who had been the last of all the gentlemen to tear himself away from the Consul General’s photographs. ‘I am afraid I am not all that well versed in your religion, gentlemen. But I believe I can inform you that Yahweh, at any rate before the beginning of the Christian era, did not regard suicide as a particularly serious crime. At its worst it was foolish. Among all his rules and commandments about everything possible, great and small, which Yahweh gave to my people I cannot remember a single word about suicide, or how a suicide should be buried, or anything of that sort. Presumably he thought it unnecessary. He knew he had given the human race such a love for life that they would not be in any great haste to deprive themselves of it. And it wouldn't have been like Yahweh
to want to force a man who had been caught stealing from a till to go on making the earth unclean with his existence. Besides, he didn’t have any hell at his disposal. The severest penalty he had was death. For that reason there was no action he could take against suicides.
‘But to go on to another point while we are sitting here waiting for Dr Luther’s catechism,’ the bank manager said as he sat himself down in the comer beside the lady in red and turned to her, ‘is it really true that they thank God in your churches when somebody has died? When a breadwinner dies in the prime of life - does the priest then thank God on behalf of the widow and the children, and the congregation?’
T don’t know,’ said the red lady, I never go to church. And when I have been to funerals I have had more to think about than listening to the priest.’
‘Oh yes,’ said the girl in white, ‘yes, that is true.’
‘Oh!... and doesn’t that offend the congregation?’
‘Only the very few of them that really think about it.’
‘How strange! Job was a godly man. The most godly man of his day. He said: “The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord.” But I don’t think he meant it. And anyway it is a very long way from that to actually thanking the Lord for the blow.’
‘But,’ said the girl in white, ‘really it is on behalf of the dead person and not those left behind that the priest thanks God.’
‘Hm... So that’s how it is... But then the dead man himself is in the best position to judge whether he has anything to be thankful for.’
In came the maid with the catechism.
‘Here you are,’ she said, ‘but they didn’t have Luther’s catechism, they only had Mazer’s.’
And she handed over a little book, which with its white label on the cover looked just like a note-book. On the label it said ‘Mazer’s Catechism’.
The professor took it, opened it and looked at it with surprise.
‘Yes,’ he said after turning over the pages for a while, ‘there really is a little Bible text here against suicide. “Do yourself no
evil.’”
He sat for a moment as if he were searching for something in his memory.
‘No, it isn’t possible,’ he finally burst out. ‘It is splendid! It is almost too much! But Mazér isn’t to blame; I remember very well - we had that text in the same place when I was a child. Do you know the context, gentlemen? Those are St Paul’s words to his gaoler Silas, when he was in prison at Philippi. When the gaoler woke him up he happened to see the door standing ajar -it was surely an angel that had opened it - and so he thought, of course, that the prisoners had escaped. The man was ready to kill himself in despair, but then Paul says: “Do yourself no evil, for all of us are here!” And that now appears in the catechism as a prohibition of suicide in general - clearly the only one that anybody could find in the whole Bible, fat as it is!’
The whole company was surprised. The old ladies said it was a silly catechism.
The girl in white, who had just been confirmed, said:
‘Please, grandfather, give me the catechism.’
She took it and threw it through the open window of the balcony down on to the street with a movement of infinitely gentle pleasure.
‘Ugh! It is starting to get cold in here after all,’ said the hostess, and closed the balcony door.
‘Well,’ came the distinguished young opera singer’s deep, sonorous voice, ‘it is still an act of cowardice to take one’s own life.’
The old ladies on the sofa leapt up with delight: ‘Yes, what a cowardly thing it is to commit suicide!’
‘Hmm,’ said the bank manager Israel, ‘hm, that’s why we have to read at school the dreadful examples of that cowardly Lucretia, and the spineless weakling Hannibal, and that frightened old wretch Cato - in short, all those who were too cowardly to look life in the face and ignominiously ran away from history.’
‘Yes,’ it was the red lady who cut in, ‘yes, not to mention Judas Iscariot, who went and hanged himself like a coward, though he could very well have bought himself a plot of land for
his silver pence and atoned for his sin by leading a virtuous life...’
The distinguished opera singer had not expected these examples; he slipped out into another room, humming an aria from Pajazzo.
‘Well,’ said the old professor, ‘it is true, of course, that it may not require any specially superhuman courage to take one’s own life. It is possible to think of cases where it takes more courage to live though it may be tempting to die. But as far as we can judge with our own eyes, the courage which is needed to continue a miserable and meaningless life is infinitely more widespread than the courage which is necessary to commit suicide. ’
The old gentleman was sitting with his eyes closed as he spoke, and he didn’t notice that one after another the company was beginning to tire of this uncomfortable subject and move away across the room.
At last only the girl in white was left.
‘Dear grandfather,’ she said, ‘you have such a lot of curious ideas. And it is a pity that some of them are right, and could make people’s lives greater and freer and more worthwhile if only they would take them seriously. But when people sense you are serious they run away.’