The Consul General at the Palace Ball
On the 21 st of January this year, as in all previous years for as far back as he could or wished to remember, Consul General Rubin had been invited to the palace ball, and he had very nearly finished dressing for the occasion. He spent a long time turning out a drawer of his secretaire and found to his vexation that he did not have a really clean white cravat; but it no longer mattered so much, since it would anyway be as good as hidden under the green neck-band of the Vasa Order. For at last he had actually become a Commander of that Order. And he made no attempt to hide from himself the satisfaction which that gave him. He was now just fifty years old, and at that age a man ought to be a Commander. Each time of life has its particular pleasures; at the age of thirty or so a simple little star on one’s dinner-jacket is most agreeable, though etiquette requires that one should joke about and give the impression that one acquired it as a result of some unfortunate accident. But at the rank of Commander life becomes serious; then joking stops, or else it has a hollow ring of envy about it which makes it as good as direct flattery. His other orders really only reminded him of past hopes which had not, or had only partially, been realized. “L’instruction publique” with its mauve ribbon reminded him that he had really desired the red ribbon of the Legion of Honour, and though his St Olav was mostly red he had, at the time when he received it, been entertaining foolish dreams of the Northern Star with its dignified black. But given the honourable ribbon of a Swedish Commander as a background, even these minor glories took on a new dignity. And this was still more the case with the big shimmering gold cross of the Order of the Alligator, which was hanging on a splendid colourful ribbon across the dressing-table mirror. That was a token of recognition from the South American republic of Mondego, whose somewhat limited interests in Stockholm Rubin had for many years cared for, and not without delicacy, in his capacity as Consul General. His friend Don Manuel Garcia, the President, with dictatorial powers, of that charming little transatlantic republic, had sent him the attractive decoration some five years ago in remembrance of his discreet help in a case of financial embarrassment during some happy days they spent together at Monte Carlo. But he had not dared to wear it until now; for it looked altogether too outlandish, and there was furthermore a rather wide gulf between a big cross and the little trifles on his coat-lapel. That gulf had at last been bridged by the ribbon of a Commander of the Vasa Order, and so with an easy conscience he took up the Order of the Alligator from his mirror and hung it for the first time over his red, gold-braided dress coat. Now he was ready; and as he looked at himself in the mirror there was only one thing he would have wished to alter - himself. For he prided himself on being no fool and also on being a pretty good judge of people; and that is why he attached so much more importance to his decorations than to himself.
*
It was a fine evening, not too cool, and glittering with stars. Rubin decided to go on foot; for it was a reasonably short walk. The clock at St James’s pointed to half past eight. That meant that he was much too early and could do as he pleased for a good hour. He hesitated by the door of a house, where an old friend of his lived. Should he go upstairs and sit talking for a while? But no, it wouldn’t be right just now. His friend, whose position in life was more humble than his own, might easily get the idea that he was trying to impress him with his finery. He went on.
He stopped by the window of a little cigar-shop and smiled amiably at his own portrait, a crude but recognizable caricature that stared at him from the front page of a comic newspaper. The cartoon depicted a symbolic brawl between a number of leading figures in public finance, most of whom were more important and better known than he was, and in whose company he was pleased to see himself caricatured. In another such paper he saw another group of public figures, and these too were mostly his own friends and acquaintances.
‘A little country and a little town,’ he thought. ‘We are such a tiny handful of figures who act on this stage, always the same people - and in a little while I shall meet the whole bunch of them at the palace. But to think that the Swedish people are interested in us and our little affairs is surely just an illusion in the heads of the people who edit comic newspapers. Still, I don’t have anything against...’
‘Good evening, mandarin! On your way to see the King, I should think, to judge by the rig-out! ’
The voice of a woman. Rubin looked round.
‘Klara! It has been such a long time! You are putting on weight.’
‘Oh well, business is pretty good. I have just closed shop and I am on my way home. If I did not imagine you have other plans, I wonder if I might invite you home with me for a whisky?’
Rubin looked at her for a moment before he replied and in a single quick glance under the gaslight he assessed the marks which the past four or five years had made on her appearance. Klara Liebmann... So slim and slender she had been. In those days she had worked in a perfume shop. Now she had a business of her own, which he and a few other friends had helped her to set up. They had never had any illusions about their relationship, and they had parted amicably. He had never really got over the vague sense of miscalculation which her cheerful talk and her natural good humour made him feel - for his first impression of her had been of two intense black eyes in a pale face which had passed him in the dusk one windy autumn evening and which had led to expect and hope for something quite different. But that was in the past. Now her face showed absolutely no sign of anything other than a gay life and a rather rich diet.
‘Well, well!’ he replied, ‘so you have whisky at home, do you? Ah well, I don't suppose His Majesty will be expecting me just yet. I can spend half an hour with you.’
He looked at his watch.
‘Do you still have your little flat?’
Yes, she still had it; it was only a few streets away.
*
Rubin walked up and down in the three little rooms, while Klara took out a decanter, two bottles of soda-water and two glasses from a little comer-cupboard in traditional folk style, with painted hearts and tulips. Rubin stopped and looked at it; it had been added since his time, together with a wall-tapestry and some cushions in the same style. ‘It appears that Skansen* is expanding,’ he said.
And then he added:
‘My wife is very fond of that style, too.’
Otherwise, things in the flat had not changed very much. On all the side-boards and tables there were lots of framed photographs as before, though not entirely the same ones as before. He couldn’t help looking for a portrait of himself and at last he found a tiny one in a comer over the tiled fireplace.
She mixed him a drink.
‘Don’t make it too strong,’ he asked.
He sank back into a large leather-clad basket-chair which he once, long ago, had bought and given her so as to have at least one piece of furniture there that he liked - otherwise he had let her litter the place up according to her own taste.
‘Don’t you think we ought to have a fire as well?’ she said.
‘There is wood in the stove already, it only wants lighting.’
But the wood was damp and refused to bum. She went out to the kitchen to fetch the paraffin-can, tossed a sprinkling of paraffin over the wood in her old Bohemian way and lit the wood again. The fire flared up until the chimney whistled and
sang and the glare of the flames flashed brightly over the red hearth-rug.
‘There!’ she said. ‘Now the labourer is entitled to her reward.’
And she made a drink for herself, sat down in the comer of the sofa, raised her glass to him and drank.
They talked a little about the ways of the world and about mutual friends, but at times there were some very long pauses.
‘How odd,’ Rubin thought to himself. ‘Four years ago there were times when I almost believed I was in love with her, and now we have practically nothing to say to each other but skål!'
‘What are you thinking about?’ she asked.
He replied: ‘Nothing at all. Skål!'
On the table beside him lay a pile of picture postcards -landscapes, folk costumes and variety stars all mixed together. He picked them up and looked at them absent-mindedly. One of them showed a Lapp girl with dark eyes, a smile that revealed her white teeth and a cheeky tuft of hair peeping out under her pointed bonnet. He looked up, surprised:
‘But surely, it’s you!' he said.
‘Yes,’ she replied. ‘A couple of years ago somebody dressed me up and photographed me for a picture-postcard firm. I’ll give you one if you like.’
‘Please yourself,’ he said.
He had let the unfriendly reply slip out without thinking. He was angry with himself, but now it was too late. There was sharp, vicious glint in her eyes. She snatched the card from him with a little jerk, stood up and started to walk up and down the room whistling to herself. He said nothing, but took a long sip of his whisky.
‘It was a strong drink you made for me,’ he said for the sake of saying something.
She stopped whistling and suddenly stood still behind his chair.
‘Listen,’ she said, ‘there is something wrong with your collar. The gold braid has come loose. I will put it right for you with a little pin. Don’t worry, I can do it so that the pin won’t be visible at all. - Like this,’ she fingered at his collar so gently that he
could scarcely feel it, ‘there - now it is all right. And now you can thank me. What on earth would the King have said if you had arrived at his palace with loose braiding on your collar?...’
And she pressed a little kiss upon his neck.
It gave him some pleasure to see that she was in a good humour again; he felt that he ought to kiss her, but she wriggled free and anyway his attempt was rather lame and led to nothing.
‘Now you must go, my friend, or else you’ll be late.’
She quickly helped him on with his fur coat, he emptied his drink, kissed her formally on the hand and left.
*
Sirius was shining right over the palace facade.
‘She is a nice girl, Klara,’ thought the Consul General as he walked across Norrbro Bridge, ‘and I shall not forget her if she needs my help one day. But the drink was a little too strong.’
Under the palace arches a remnant of his old sense of reverence overcame him, and Charles XII’s bodyguard on the stairs gave him a vague feeling that Sweden’s history was still proceeding at full speed and that he himself had a part in it. But when, after shaking as lightly as possible the hand of the first palace marshal, he found himself in the company of old comrades and friends, he felt quite at home as usual and he only experienced - as usual - a slight unease because his uniform coat was red. He would rather have had it in the same dark blue as an ordinary Swedish civil uniform, but it couldn’t be helped.
A little Russian attaché who had been home with him for dinner a few days ago gave him his hand with a little bow.
‘Well,’ asked Rubin, ‘is it going to be war?’
‘Like hell,’ answered the Russian in French. ‘We have no reason to look for a war with Japan just at present. Indeed, from several points of view it would be rather inconvenient. And the way things are we shall be the ones who determine the date for the outbreak of hostilities. If Mutsuhito or whatever his name is really does want a beating to remember us by then he will have to be so good as to wait a little.’
The Consul General had in his youth been to Southern China on a business trip and therefore regarded himself as something of an expert on Japan.
T feel sorry for Mutsuhito,’ he said. ‘He is far too clever to wish for a war with Russia; but he could be driven to it by his people. That’s how it is these days - the war-lust of the princes is a thing of the past. Now it is the people who...’
He went on undaunted, but, as sometimes happened when he spoke French, he fell into old phrases which were stored up in his brain and which led him away from what he really meant to say until he forgot it and said something else, sometimes the very opposite. As he was talking, his eyes wandered towards a mirror. It struck him that an empty space had developed at his back - it was almost as if people were forming a semicircle behind him - and he saw in the mirror two lieutenants with their hands over their mouths eyeing him in a peculiar way. What could it be that they found so funny? He could see nothing apart from the Russian whom he was talking to, and he did indeed look a little comic, but after all...
Suddenly he saw in the mirror the Chamberlain von Pestel -one of his wife’s cousins - coming up to him and felt his hand touch him gently on the shoulder.
‘Good evening, my old friend,’ said Pestel. ‘Where have yew come from?’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Rubin.
Pestel had removed something from his collar - a little card, which he handed to Rubin. Rubin stared in bewilderment at the face of a pretty girl with smiling white teeth and with a tuft of black hair peeping out under a pointed Lapp bonnet.
‘What is that?’ he stammered.
‘An unauthorized decoration,’ said Pestel.