The Burning Town
Through the two windows of the room with their bright lattice-work blinds shines the clear winter sunlight in two long diagonal patterns across the soft green rug, and on the warm sunny patches a little boy is dancing up and down. He does not know very much about the world yet. He knows that he is little and he is going to grow up, but he does not know that he has been born or that he is going to die. He knows he is four years old and will soon be five, but he does not know the meaning of the word ‘year’: he still measures time only by ‘yesterday’, ‘today’ and ‘tomorrow’.
‘Daddy,’ he suddenly says to his father, who has just finished breakfast and lit the first cigar of the day - for he measures time by cigars - T dreamed such a lot last night! I dreamed about all this room! I dreamed about the chairs and the green rug and the mirror and the clock and the big stove and its doors and its little shelves!’
And he runs up to the stove where the morning fire is blazing and crackling away and does a head-over-heels in front of it. He regards the stove and the place in front of it as the best and most important part of the room.
His father nods genially over the top of his newspaper. And the little boy laughs back at him wildly. He is at the age when laughter still expresses simple joy, and not a sense for the comical. The other evening he stood in the window and laughed at the moon, not because he thought the moon was funny but because he was delighted at the sight of its round shiny face.
When he has finished laughing he gets up on his knees on a chair and points at one of the pictures on the wall. ‘And most of
all I dreamed about that picture,’ he says.
The picture is a photographic reproduction of an old Dutch master called A Burning Town.
‘Well, what did you dream about it?’ asks his father.
T don’t know.’
‘Oh, try to remember!’
‘Well, I dreamed that there was a fire and I patted a dog.’
‘But you are afraid of dogs!’
‘Oh yes, but on pictures I can pat a dog a little bit.’
And he laughs and dances up and down.
Then he comes back to his father and says: ‘Take the picture down, daddy! I want you to show me the picture again as you did yesterday.’
The picture is a newcomer to the room. It only arrived the day before. The little boy has long since got to know the other pictures round the walls, Uncle Strindberg and Uncle Schopenhauer and Uncle Napoleon and ugly old Goethe and Granny when she was young. But the Burning Town is new, and apart from that it is a jollier picture than the others anyway. His father does as the little boy asks and takes the picture down from the wall and they look at it together. Over a broad river estuary which bends its way out to the sea and is full of boats and ships there is a bridge with rounded arches and a tower. On the left bank lies the burning town: rows of narrow houses with pointed gables and high roofs, churches and steeples; masses of people milling about in confusion, a sea of fire and flames, clouds of smoke, ladders propped against the walls, horses bolting away with their carts tipping over, the quay full of barrels and sacks and all sorts of lumber, on the river a crowd of people in a boat which is on the point of capsizing, people running for their lives across the bridge and right in the foreground two dogs stand sniffing at each other. Deep in the background, where the river broadens out towards the sea, a much too little moon sits upon the horizon in a haze of faint clouds and looks down on all the misery with a pale, sad face.
‘Daddy,’ the little boy asks, ‘why is the town burning?’ ‘Somebody has been careless with fire,’ says his father.
‘Who has been careless?’
‘Well, one can’t exactly know that so long afterwards.’
‘How long afterwards?’
‘It is several hundred years since that town was burnt down,’ says his father.
The little boy will not be any the wiser for that answer, his father knows very well, but he has to say something. The boy sits quietly for a moment meditating. New ideas and new conceptions of things are moving about in his brain and jostling with the old ones. He points with his tiny fingers touching the glass over the burning town and says:
‘Yes, but it was burning yesterday, and it’s burning today as well, isn’t it?’
His father tries to explain the difference between pictures and reality. ‘This is not a real town,’ he says, ‘it is only a picture. The real town was burnt down a long, long time ago. It’s gone now. The people who are running about here and waving their arms are dead now and they don't exist any more. The houses have burnt down. The steeples have collapsed. The bridge has gone, too.’
‘Did the steeples bum down or fall down?’ asks the boy.
‘They burned and they fell.’
‘Are the steamers dead too?’
‘The boats have been gone for a long time,’ says the father. ‘But they are not steamers, they are sailing boats. There weren’t any steamers in those days.’
The little boy sticks out his bottom lip and looks displeased.
‘But I can see that they are steamers', he says. 'Daddy, what is this steamer called?’
He certainly has a mind of his own, this boy. His father is tired of answering questions and says nothing. The boy points his finger at the old Dutch merchant-ships and talks to himself: this steamer is called Brage, and this one is Hillerjö, and this is the Princess Ingerborg.
‘Daddy,’ he says all at once, ‘is the moon gone too?’
‘No, the moon is still there. That is the only thing in the whole picture that still exists now. It is the same moon as you
laughed at the other day in the playroom window.’
Again the little boy sits quietly and meditates. Then comes another question:
‘Daddy, is it a very long time since that town burned down? Is it as long ago as when we went into the country on the Princess Ingerborg?’
‘It is much, much longer ago than that,’ answers his father.
‘When that town burned down, neither you nor I nor mummy nor granny existed.’
The boy’s face suddenly turns very serious. He looks really worried. He sits quietly for a long time meditating. But it seems that he can’t make all his thoughts fit together.
‘Daddy,’ he asks at last, ‘where was I when that town burned down? Was it when I was in Gränna with mummy?’
‘No, my lad,’ his father replies, ‘when that town burned down you didn’t exist yet at all.’
The boy protrudes his bottom lip again with a face that says: No, this I can’t accept. And he repeats emphatically:
‘But where was I then?'
His father replies: ‘You didn’t exist at all!’
The boy looks up at his father with big eyes. Suddenly the whole little face lights up, he tears himself away from his father and starts to dance up and down in the patch of sunlight on the green rug and he shouts at the top of his voice:
‘Oh yes, of course I did! / existed anyway; of course I did!’
He thought his father was just pulling his leg. This was obviously too crazy to be true! The maids sometimes told him tall stories for a joke, and now he thinks that his father is doing the same.
And he dances up and down in the sun.