The Chinese
I woke up last night and could not get back to sleep again. It was not dark and not light in the room, for it was a summer night. Strips of milky light mixed with ash-pale shadows. There were little spots and points of light and narrow bright streaks in the mirror on the wall and in the three-sided brass arms of the chandelier. The window was open. I heard voices from the street and stifled laughter. Between the slats of the Venetian blind, which was green in daylight but was now dark grey, there shone a red star. I decided it must be Mars. There are plenty of red stars, but the sky was not dark enough for any of the fixed stars to be shining so brightly, and of tire planets the obvious one to think of was Mars.
I lay there going over old thoughts and memories, some of them sad, most of them completely meaningless. In my ears I kept hearing a tune that I detest. I thought to myself:
‘It clearly is not our will that decides which melodies rise up in our soul, or whether we hear any melody at all. It is also not my will that decides which thoughts come to me, or whether I have any thoughts at all. And my will, is it controlled by myself, my conscious self? Far from it. I often wish things that I wish I did not wish - ’
If only I could get to sleep.
The star kept on shining pale and red in the ash-grey sky. An old verse rose up in my memory
Men live their lives
Always alone.
Like stars they pass
And do not meet.
Where did I get that from? Oh, I remember. It is a Chinese poem by Li Po, ‘the immortal who loved to drink’. He drank rice sake from a china cup. Often he looked too deeply into the cup. And that was the death of him, for one night, when he had emptied many cups, he tripped on the gangplank of his patron’s pleasure boat and drowned in the Yellow River. That was about the same time as Ansgar was preaching Christianity in this country, I suppose, and turning people’s values upside down... Yes, how time flies!...
Have I ever met a Chinese? No... - Oh yes, I have. At one of the big hotels here in town one of the waiters at one time was Chinese. God knows how he got there. His job was to speak English, but he also spoke Danish. He was of slender build and had a face like a child’s. His skin was pale brown, and he reminded me very much of Chulalongkorn and his Siamese who were here in ’97. His eyes were attractive, gentle and intelligent. Round his lips he had a network of those fine old-age wrinkles and folds which are characteristic of the ancient races of the Far East.
It was in the days soon after the Battle of Mukden. I tried to lead him into temptation by asking ‘Are you Japanese?’ He answered in a low, soft voice with a slightly religious tone T come from China.’ ‘And where from then?’ - ‘Sang-hay’ - ‘Oh, Shang-hai...’
I watched him closely as he served a party near my table, some members of the First Chamber. He made a most civilized impression beside them. And I had to chuckle to myself as I watched their elephantine bodies, their lumpy, puffed-up faces and their waxy, colourless eyes and remembered how at school we were taught that the ideal of human beauty is represented by the Germanic race. And there was no possible doubt that this still was the opinion of these senators.
But the little Chinese was popular with the guests and an object of universal interest and he got generous tips; and when his fellow-waiters of Aryan descent noticed that, their faces became yellower than his and their eyes looked more squintily at him than his at them, and one of the more racist of them stood in
a comer clenching his fists under the napkin and seemed to be practising boxing movements...
Men live their lives
Always alone...
I lay with my eyes closed so as to sleep, but a cool wind over my eyelids forced me to open them. A moth had flown into the room and went back and forward for a while in the ash-grey half-light and then was silent and gone. Through the window I heard a drunkard’s staggering steps along the pavement. And the star glittered.
I looked and thought of the well-known telescopic picture of Mars with its wonderful network of dead-straight ‘canals’ or vegetation strips. And I knew that these straight lines proved that the planet must be inhabited. We know from spectrum analysis that it is made up of roughly the same elements as the earth. But in their natural outcrops, fissures and contours these elements never form a straight or anywhere near straight line of any considerable length. No river, no coastline, no mountain ridge and no natural belt of vegetation forms a straight line. The straight line is a product of art; it is a correction of the vagaries of nature. What sort of beings can they be who irrigate their fields with these absolutely straight canals? Do they perhaps know more about our planet than we do about theirs? Are they at this moment making poems to express the same melancholy feeling as the Chinese poet expressed a thousand years ago? Did they think ten thousand years ago the thoughts which are now called new and dangerous down here? It is clear that one species, one form of life must there, as here, have seized power over all the others in order to impress upon that little planet the mark of their will and their needs. But is that life-form anything like man? Or is it perhaps some kind of giant ant with strong social instincts and highly developed engineering skills but no aptitude for philosophy? Does their race live and work in this present time, or did they perhaps die out long ago, just leaving behind the dark network of water and greenery in the red desert sands as a sign of their brief existence?
Useless questions. If only I could get to sleep!
The second time I saw the little Chinese was one wild night in the big hotel’s restaurant. There was a group of us from the world of books, pens and pads. Markel was with us, and he was drunk. He talked philosophy with the Chinese. It goes without saying that the sort of philosophy that an old Uppsala student - even if he had not been under the influence of strong drink - can talk with a Chinese waiter must be of the most general kind.
‘Dear little Chinaman,’ he said, ‘what do you think about death?’
The face of the Chinese betrayed the fact that he was trying to conceal his surprise at being asked what was, in the circumstances, so strange a question. To talk of death with a stranger is in the highest degree improper. And this strange devil was visibly drunk and would have been even in a sober condition a boorish person. His face tried to hide these thoughts, and he clearly wanted to avoid having to answer the question. But Markel repeated it:
‘Dear little Chinaman, I swear by all the devils and dragons in the world you will get no bloody tip from me if you don’t tell me what you think about death.’
The Chinese smiled affably, pale under the brown skin. He thought carefully before answering. In his face there was a firm resolve not to say what he thought, but what might be most suitable. And therefore he finally gave the reply which Confucius once gave one of his disciples in answer to the same question, and which he - the waiter - had most probably had to learn as a small child in a primary school in Shanghai:
‘ - We do not yet know what life is; how, then, shall I be able to say anything concerning death?’
This reply came with a polite smile, in a Danish that was beginning to sound slightly Swedish. And he recited it with a fast tongue, like a response out of the catechism, which perhaps is what it really was.
We looked at each other in surprise. Markel became wild with delight. He wanted to embrace the Chinese. He practically hailed him as a brother. He said he would travel to the Far East and take
him with him. He pulled some banknotes out of his trousers pocket and tried to force them upon him, but the Chinese retired, bowing and smiling, and the banknotes fell on the floor. We prepared to leave. In the foyer the Chinese came and gave the banknotes to one of us in a carefully wrapped package. Markel was already out on the street, where he was getting familiar with a coachman -
Outside I could hear the sound of brooms sweeping the street. Daylight was beginning to appear, and the red star was becoming more pale.
Again I tried to guess what sort of shape and form the rulers of the little red planet might have. Human beings like ourselves they cannot be, unless by some highly improbable coincidence of entirely identical circumstances. I tried to imagine them as extremely clever, intelligent elephants, perhaps furnished with wings. I thought of them as large birds with their claws evolved into very capable hands. But then I remembered that with birds everything has to be very light, including the brain, and that the lightness of the winged creatures in conquering gravity relieves them of one important reason for needing to exercise their intellect and inventiveness. No, earthbound, tied to the earth and longing to rise above it, driven along by the harsh demands of a thousand necessities, that is what those beings must be like which are to be able to break free from the limits of their own existence, to surpass themselves and transform their world to suit their own convenience...
If only I could get to sleep!
Just once more I saw the little Chinese. It was an early summer morning by the waterfront at the Strömparterre. I had gone out there now, while it was empty and quiet under the big trees, had got away from the hellish noise on the streets and squares to squeeze the juice out of a lemon and to read a book. There was nobody there except myself and the Chinese. He stood bending over the railings looking down into the fast-flowing current. I was sitting at a table not far from him. I didn’t notice him until he turned to me and said good morning. I replied to his greeting. Now, without his uniform and exposed to the merciless sunshine,
I thought he looked poor and sick. He was standing so close to me that I thought I ought to say something.
‘It is beautiful here, don’t you think?’ I asked.
He considered a little, as if he needed time to understand the question. Then he replied:
‘It is strange.’
He passed me slowly, stopped a little further along and stood by the railing looking down into the water.
The next day I went into the restaurant.
‘What has happened to the Chinese?’ I asked the waiter who was pouring my coffee.
He was a well-fed young man who moved his elbows smoothly and had the head-waiter’s baton in his knapsack.
‘He has left,’ he replied.
And he added in a half superior, half apologetic tone:
‘ - He didn’t fit in here.’
*
The star has faded and gone away. A milk-cart is rattling along the street.
If only I could get to sleep!