THE MISCONDUCT MARK
I AM sitting alone in my room, and the lamp is singing.
The window is open to the warm spring evening, and voices from the street sometimes float up to me, but no articulate word. I am sitting with a photograph in my hand, and, as sometimes happens with me, I have sat and stared at it so long that finally the face has become strange and I can no longer glimpse the soul behind the fixed smile of the picture. In a room somewhere near, underneath me or alongside, someone is playing the piano—some schoolgirl tinkling away. I seem to see a little mouse of fourteen or fifteen, puckering out her lips and doing her best, though she has too much work reading the notes to think of what it sounds like. It’s the song from King for a Day, “Her name and birth concern me not.”
Lord! how the time goes. To think there was a time when I loved that sickly melody with all my innocent heart, and the whole opera for that matter. How Zephoris bewitched me with his thin tenor, his voluptuous eyes, and his noble sentiment! “With eyes averted I laid on the shore my lovely burden. I had saved her life, I wished also to spare her modesty.” And the wicked Prince Kadoor in his green satin dressing gown: “Aha! me noble monawk, sleep thou the sleep of gilded luxureh! Thy mortal foe sleeps not.” But above all the beauteous aria, “Her name and birth”—I went around humming and whistling it for days on end.
Once it came near to causing me a terrible misfortune.
It was when I was twelve and in the Fourth Form. It was in spring and the term was nearly through. I had given a fair account of myself all the long winter and could await the examination and final marks with equanimity— I always awaited them with equanimity anyhow. It was the lesson in Mother Tongue. No assignment work to be questioned on, just the reading of Frithiof’s Saga. All was quiet and peaceful, there was no premonition of danger. But it was the calm before the storm.
I had read the poem before, many times, and soon tired of following the reading. In this feeling I was not alone; the inattention was quite general, and we amused ourselves in various ways, all of them old and timeworn. A snuff-box was passed from desk to desk, spitballs flew through the air, and a paper butterfly described a lovely curve and alighted on the master’s platform. Perhaps this was intended as a delicate allusion to his well known weakness for sipping. But the master was notoriously mild, he commanded no respect and was no doubt exhausted after one of his sprees. At any rate he ignored the butterfly.
But suddenly something quite dreadful happened. Somebody started whistling—whistling!—clearly and feelingly in the middle of the lesson, “Her name and birth.”
I wasn’t fully aware that it was I who was whistling before I stopped myself. But it was too late. The room had become deadly silent, and when I saw the worst rowdy in the class turn and look at me with something like amazement in his glance, I began to divine that what I had done was something that went beyond all bounds.
The master’s face was dark red. I was one of the nicest boys in the class and one of his favorites. That increased the bitterness of the insult which he felt he had suffered.
“You—you—he groaned—“you ruffian! What do you mean? You guttersnipe!”
I felt everything dance around me. But I thought I ought to answer something, ought to try to explain. So at last I came out with an answer which contained the truth and nothing but the truth, but which unfortunately was ill fitted to the teacher’s comprehension.
I said, “I forgot myself.”
I thought the man would have a stroke. His face became dark blue. He gasped.
“Out,” he cried, “out with you! I’ve never in my life heard such insolence. Out! Monitor, give him a misconduct mark! Get out!”
The world grew black before my eyes. I opened and closed the door as softly as I could and stole out.
I went to the spigot and drank some water. It was tepid and brackish and nearly choked me. I took out my handkerchief and kept near the basin, so as to pretend I had the nosebleed in case Snuffy, the head-master, should pass me in the corridor.
What had occurred was something frightful. It was the greatest calamity that had so far overtaken me. A misconduct mark was something hideous. What would papa say? I remember how angry he had got once when I came home with a black mark, and that was only for disorder. But a misconduct mark! That meant misbehavior, it put me down among the ragamuffins. In the end I
sought and found some consolation in the thought which had already come to me several times, especially in times of discouragement. I thought: This isn’t real; I’m in a dream. “Life is a dreamI had often heard my mother use such expressions. And for me at that moment this was the whole truth. I thought: I can’t be sure anything is real; everything I hear and see and experience may very likely be dreams that I’m dreaming. And the other people—the master, the boys ? To them I am likewise a dream. I had just borrowed a copy of Shakespeare from the school library, and my lips whispered words of which I did not yet know how world-famous they were:
“We are such stuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded with a sleep.
I’m dreaming, I’m dreaming.”
Here the monitor opened the door of the classroom.
“You are to come in and read,” he said.
With downcast eyes I went in and took my seat. My neighbor showed me where we were in the book: it was “Frithiof’s Farewell” that I was to read.
I read. The further I read, the more I felt that Frithiof’s fate was my own. He was an outlaw, a wolf’s-head. I had been expelled and put by the water basin.
I came to the final lines:
Seek not the strand there, Safe on your pillow
Rest when the darkness descends on your home, Lest on the sand there,
Borne by the billow
Frithiof’s corpse should be tossed in the foam.
Ifi'my fancy I beheld my own body rolling in the waves and washed up on the shore, while on the shore stood the master and all the class, and the master was filled with remorse for having given me a misconduct mark. But it was too late!
I believe it was at that moment that I first felt the mighty joy of releasing one’s passion in poetry. I could hardly utter the last lines for emotion, and when I had finished, I burst into violent sobs.
“Come, come, boy,” said the teacher, “don’t cry, don’t cry! I’ve been as bad as you. Stop the wailing and I’ll let you off your misconduct mark!”
He thought it was because of the misconduct mark was crying.