THE DARKNESS GATHERS
ONCE more an autumn, like so many other autumns.
I am walking on a gray country road. I have been walking long and I am tired. I seem to have been walking many years.
The clouds above me hang in heavy layers. The wind sings in the telegraph wires along the road. There comes to mind an old trifle of verse that I wrote once in my joyless youth:
The darkness gathers above me
And heavy grows the way, And heavy the thoughts I carry In the twilight’s deepening gray.
But out by the rim of the forest
I see a distant light.
First it shines clear, it’s out then, And now once more it is bright.
There’s someone beside a lamp there, Or two—let it be as it may.
The darkness gathers above me
And heavy grows the way.
I wrote that poem fifteen or sixteen years ago with the delusive hope of getting five crowns for it from some weekly magazine. But there was none that would take it.
Why does one always write such melancholy verse in one’s youth ? Is it a premonition of all the untoward and dismal things that are impending? Is it true, as someone has said, that one’s poetizing is a prophecy of one’s own
life? Perhaps there is something in the idea. In my youth I wrote various things that had no experience behind them but which I have had to live through later. At times reality imitated the poetry in such detail that I seemed to have suffered the worst pains beforehand. That made them lighter.
And in my sad youth I expected very little of life on the whole. There may have been a sort of self-protection in that: not expecting anything. Perhaps it was the delicate policy of instinct, to escape being deceived. I sometimes surprise myself now dreaming dreams of the future far bolder and more childlike than any I ever ventured in my youth. When one is young, one is so afraid of being childish. With years one becomes a bit more courageous, in that respect at least.
Ah! there is the sun. A sickly and over-ripe autumn sun. It breaks out a minute through the cloud strata. Pales, expires, and is gone.
Gold and gray: it is a beautiful combination. I wonder if I shall ever be rich enough to get me a set of parlor furniture in gold and gray. The curtains too should be gold and gray. Gray edged with gold.
Gold and blue is handsome also, but that would not suit for me. That is for the kingdom of heaven.
And to dare have furniture of gold and red one must be an emperor.
The sun is gone and twilight settles down. A flock of crows are flapping around a scarecrow. The darkness
gathers above the road, and I go on and on. The eternal way.
It is evening and I sit alone in my lonely room by a lighted candle, for I never remember to fill my lamp.
I sit and play with my watch. My old silver watch. It has gone through many experiences and has a very wise and knowing face. I sit and turn the hands, and according as I turn them, the old watch alters its face and expression, reviving memories and moods from the past.
I turn the hands to half-past seven. That might be a summer morning. I see a newly raked gravel plot, a hedge with dew-pearls on the spider webs, dewy bushes and grass. The world was new. The world was young. And my mother had on a pink dress.
Or it is a winter morning. The frost bites the skin. The snow creaks underfoot. It is still dark, a solitary gas lamp blinks stupidly through the cold fog. And I trudge off to school. How I remember the rust-yellow gas lights of my boyhood, how warm and comforting was their gleam across the snow! Later came the corpse-green arc lights.
Or it is an evening in October. Shadows are lurking in every corner. Half-sleeping misfortunes lie waiting in ambush. Waiting their time of ripeness, like fruit in the autumn.
“Think not to foresee all future perils”....
When I turn the hands to ten minutes of ten, I remember an encounter with an enemy. What is an enemy? Why do people hate each other? Those who hate each
other imagine for the most part that their feeling is based on a great and profound difference between them. But it is not so. On the contrary it rests on the strong resemblance between them, which makes them both long for the same thing. A bull hates another bull. He does not hate a cock. Last summer I found myself accidentally in Vexiö. At twilight I went around in the city churchyard looking for Tegner’s grave. He lies buried there in the midst of many kinsfolk. I found the grave and on it two tomcats fighting. They were chequered black and white and were so much alike that it was impossible to distinguish one from the other. They fought so that the hair flew. I thought then of my enemy and laughed at our hate.
... When I turn the hands to twelve, the watch takes on a stern and impartial aspect. It signifies Justice. It can also signify Power. What is justice? Power is not justice, but power is the father of justice. Power is the father: a parvenu, a self-made man. Justice is the son: not as strong as the father but somewhat more refined. And yet of the same blood.
What am I sitting here dithering about ?
I will tell you a story or two about my watch, if it will amuse anyone.
I bought it with the first money I ever earned. I was fifteen and was tutoring a boy who was several classes below me in school. Unfortunately my instruction bore ill fruit for the boy. The point was that I had conceived a personal hatred for Charles X. I maintained that he was a humbug and a rascal. I expounded the idea that he must
have been a most puerile statesman to imagine that Sweden could have any pleasure in conquering Poland, and that, when he had failed in this mad project, it was a pure accident that he happened to win Scania, Halland, and Blekinge instead. All this, to be sure, was fairly close to the truth, but it betrayed a lack of the historical sense. And, strictly speaking, it was not quite honorable of me to tell the boy the truth when I was being paid to teach him history. Nor did I leave much of Charles XII. To be brief, the boy was flunked in his examinations, but I got my money and bought me a silver watch.
And I grew up and went about with the silver watch in my pocket, seeking for the fountain of truth from which Odin drank. One must, as is well known, pay with the loss of an eye for the privilege of drinking from it. And it is just there the trick comes in. For when one has but a single eye, one can see things only in one way. Then one knows exactly what one should think and believe. One becomes as clever and innocent as a god, and everything goes well.
I have also heard that there is another fountain of wisdom. It is deeper than the first, and the water, too, is much colder. It is so cold that the blood freezes if one drinks of it. And he who has once drunk of it smiles no more, except at the wisdom of those who have drunk from Odin’s spring. But the prize is a bit staggering. It is not the payment of one eye but of one’s first heart and one’s right hand. As to the first heart the loss is not great; it would ache itself away in any case. But the hand! One’s right hand! That is a risky business.
This is what I have been told about fountains of wisdom, but I myself know nothing for sure.
However, one day as I was going around looking for the fountain of wisdom—I did not know yet that there was more than one—I met a girl on Queen Street. Lord! but she was ravishing. And the day, the day! A day of melting snow, with drippings from the eaves, and sun, and sharp gusts with a suggestion of spring. And the girl, the girl! But she was a naughty girl, that one could see at a glance. She stopped in front of a florist’s window; I stopped too. Our eyes met. Very softly I asked where she lived. She had the kindness to enlighten me on the subject.
“Ask for Svea,” she whispered.
I remained standing and gazed after her as she disappeared in the crowd.
As usual I had no money. In my pocket I had the poem “The Darkness Gathers Above Me.” I had traipsed about with it from one editorial office to another. But there was no one who had any use for my five crowns’ worth of melancholy.
Still—glory be!—I had my silver watch. Humming “Hear us, Svea!” I took the shortest cut to the nearest pawnbroker’s.
The girl was a darling. I told her I had put my watch up the spout to come to her. She was delighted at that. Before I left I read her my poem. She thought it was beautiful. She said so with such a sincere look that I was forced to believe her, which consoled me for the hardheartedness of the editors.
I said to her before we parted, “I like you; you’re so good.”
She did not appear specially touched by this compliment. I then expounded it further and said that I meant “good” in the sense of the natives, talking of the missionary they had just eaten. Then she brightened up, kissed me, and told me to come again, often.
After that—oh, after that there were bad times. Day and night I longed for her. And I seldom had money. I wrote the wretchedest verse that ever was written for the worst magazines in existence. I sold my winter overcoat. I pawned my dress suit. I sold my books, the few I had. I could have sold my soul.
Can one love a girl of the streets ? Indeed one can. It is a calamity that has befallen many.
. . . She has been dead these many years since. A comrade of mine, a child of misfortune, took her life and his own one day out at a country restaurant. One morning after a night of Carnival.
He loved her.
Since then many a winter’s snow has fallen lightly over her light little heart. And possibly there is no one in the world but me who remembers her.
. . . Lut I redeemed my silver watch, became a man again, wrote things that the editors liked better than my verses, and I am still alive. I live on and on. Cod! how tedious life is getting to be.
I stare and stare at the solitary candle dame till my eyes go blind.
Once—not so long ago—I wanted to write a poem in which I compared my soul to a flaring candle flame. But it did not get to be a poem—only four lines.
Tired of pain and tired of pleasure, Like a flamelet, soul, you wend Hourlong down the candle’s measure Till you reach the end.
If one were only old!
Today I sat at a festal board beside an old gentleman who wore a big decoration. The champagne had perked him up and opened his heart.
He said to me: “It’s fine to be old. Youth was the very devil.”