The Talented Dragon
Once upon a time Pampus XIII was King of Pelargonia. He was from the beginning a pious, god-fearing king and a lover of peace, since he was not much good at war. But at last he became a mighty war hero, and that is what this story is about.
His queen, Pomponia, was fair and virtuous and very godfearing, and they had an only daughter, a lovely, delightful, shining pearl, the Princess Finissa, who was due to be married soon to her cousin, the Duke of Callipasta.
Word of this forthcoming marriage spread through the town until it came to the ears of Hannes Elsaffan, the young singer of songs; and thereupon he fell into a black despair. For he had seen the Princess Finissa one day when he had been summoned to the palace to sing his songs, and since that day he had loved her with a love that exceeded all reason and he likened her in his thoughts to a smiling moonbeam. But the Duke of Callipasta, who was a fat, flabby, arrogant prince, he likened in his heart to a great white louse. And Elsaffan, who dwelt with his old mother in a miserable shack on the outskirts of the town, went home and threw himself upon the old woman’s breast and told her of his mad, hopeless love for the Princess Finissa. And when he would not leave off his weeping she tried to console him by telling him the story of The Hungry But Ambitious Cat:
An old, old woman, more wizened that a dead briar bush, lived in a little hut more fragile than a spider’s web, more narrow than the closed fist of a miser and more dim than the understanding of a war-lord. She had a cat that had never set eyes upon anything that so much as resembled food but
contented himself with sniffing at the scent of the mice in their holes and looking hungrily at the traces left by their feet. And if, on some rare occasion, he actually caught a mouse, he acted like a poor beggar who has found a great treasure: his face lit up and he said to himself: ‘Ye gods! Is this a dream?’ But one day, when he was almost dying of hunger, he jumped up on to the roof of the hut, and he saw on the neighbour’s garden wall another cat, so fat that he could scarcely walk, strutting about like a lion with a measured and dignified air. At the sight of this the hungry cat let out a cry of astonishment and said: ‘Sir, you look as if you have been at a banquet with the Emperor of China!’
‘As a matter of fact, I /rave just come from the royal table,’ said the fat cat; ‘at dinner time each day I betake myself to the King’s gate and I always find some fat piece of meat. That is my way of life.’
‘Tell me, sir, I pray you,’ said the poor cat, ‘what do you mean by “a fat piece of meat”?’
The fat cat laughed, surprised at such ignorance:
‘You common little wretch, fancy not knowing that! But you look the type. Your appearance is a disgrace to the whole feline race. You have eyes and ears and whiskers like a cat, but the rest of you looks more like a spider’s web.’
‘My noble brother,’ said the poor cat humbly, ‘you know that of all the animals we cats are the ones who most religiously observe the commandment to love our neighbours. Would you not therefore be so kind, sir, as to take me with you tomorrow when you go to the royal palace?’
'I suppose I could do that,’ said the fat cat, ‘for you look so shrivelled up that I cannot help feeling sorry for you.’
The thin cat returned home to the good old woman and told her of the new way of life that was opening up before him. But the old woman advised him to put aside such thoughts of vainglory and she warned him of the dangers that attend ambition. ‘Those who are ambitious,’ she said, ‘are satisfied in the end only by the earth that rests upon their graves. Contentment is the only true happiness. Those who go out to
seek their fortune must be taught that the gods only love him who is contented with his lot.’
But the hungry cat dreamed all night of the fat pieces of meat from the royal table and the next day he betook himself to the royal palace together with the fat cat. But before they had reached the palace he fell into one of the snares of Fate. Some archers had been sent out to kill certain cats that had been stealing fish and meat from the royal kitchen, and in order to trap the cats they had placed a big plate full of fat pieces of meat by the roadside. The hungry cat, having no sin upon his conscience, threw himself upon the meal with transports of delight; but he had hardly started eating when he was struck by an arrow. ‘Alas,’ he said as he took to flight, his poor blood running out from the wound, ‘if ever I escape from this alive I will never again leave my little corner and my little mice. ’
This sad story, which Hannes Elsaffan had heard his mother tell so many times of an autumn evening when he was a boy, gave him no consolation. He wept for three days and would not eat. But on the fourth day he went out into the wilderness to seek out an old prophet who lived as a hermit and was thought to have magic powers.
‘Is it true that you can work magic?’ he asked.
‘It is both true and untrue. For I cannot do anything which is by nature impossible for a human being. But I have thought out a few things which other men will not discover for a few hundred or perhaps a few thousand years yet.’
‘How do you mean?’ Elsaffan asked in surprise. ‘Will people in the future come to discover things which we and our fathers have not known? I was taught as a child that the wise ancients were the wisest of all men and that since their time mankind has become ever more foolish.’
‘There is wisdom and wisdom. The wise men of old will always remain the wisest of all. But there will come a time when any fool can do a number of things which the wise men of old considered impossible. Tricks and trifles of no special importance. But what is it you want of me?’
‘I do not even know that myself. But I am in love with the
Princess Finissa. Could you not arrange things so that I could see her sometimes?’
‘Hm,’ said the old man, ‘it’s Princess Finissa, is it? She is a lovely girl. I should fall in love with her myself if I were your age. But she is still nothing compared with the dancer Ylitta whom I knew in my youth. You should have seen her - ah!’
‘But she is now dead and buried, and I am in love with the Princess Finissa!’
‘Let me think,’ said the old man. ‘The princess is betrothed to the Duke of Callipasta. He is a stingy, sanctimonious, arrogant scoundrel and a year ago he cheated me of the fee for a little service I had performed for him. I would enjoy playing a trick on him. Hm! Princess Finissa lives in a tower of gilded copper and her balcony faces the sunset. Hm! I shall have to think about this. You had better come back in a week’s time.’
‘Will it cost very much?’ Hannes asked with some embarrassment. T am afraid I have to tell you that 1 do not have very much money...’
‘Nonsense! ’ the old man replied. ‘A poor young man who is a poet and in love as well - I can help him for nothing.’
During the following week Hannes Elsaffan wrote the finest love-poems that were ever produced in the history of Pelargonian literature, and he set them to music and sang them in the evenings in the market place and he was given many a silver coin by the people. For he was known to all and he was well liked for his merry humour. And he not only sang his own songs, but he also told stories that he had learnt from his mother. And one evening, outside the Blue Lantern, he told this story of The White Louse And Firejaws The Flea:
The King of Lappatraskia, our traditional enemy, once had a large, splendid bed which was heaven itself, and in that bed dwelt a white louse which had grown big and fat by sucking the King’s blood. One day, the far-travelled itinerant flea Firejaws came to pay a visit, but he was not made welcome according to the sacred laws of hospitality.
‘My friend,’ said the white louse, ‘what are you doing here and where have you come from? This is, to put it plainly, no
place for you. I suggest that you take your leave, for that would be in your own best interest.’
‘But Your Excellency,’ said the flea, ‘what sort of a reception is this that you give me? I am not accustomed to such treatment. It is customary to say “How are you? Do sit down! I am delighted to see you!”’
‘If you imagine,’ the louse replied in a superior tone, ‘that I am flattered at being called “Excellency”, then you are quite mistaken. For I can tell you there is royal blood in my veins.’
‘As far as that goes,’ answered the flea, ‘I am prepared to bet that before very long the same blood will flow in my veins. That is what I have come here for. I have been about in the world and I have tasted the blood of many different kinds of people. I like the blood of young girls most of all. But I have also dined with philosophers; their blood had a sour, bitter taste. The blood of poets I have also tasted; it was not very nutritious. I have just come now from a rich usurer; but he was a miser who made do with still worse food than the poets, and so his blood was the poorest fare I have ever had. But I have heard that the King eats a good deal of confectionery and drinks great quantities of wine, and so his blood ought to be sweet and tasty.’
‘Quiet!’ said the white louse, ‘I can hear the King coming! You must keep still at least until he is asleep.’
And the King came in, heavy with wine, and cast himself upon his bed. But Firejaws was on him at once, biting him now here, now there, in a dozen places almost at the same time.
‘Aaow!’ said the King, ‘what the devil is this? Vermin in the bed - in my bed? Servants ho! And bring torches!’
A few lord chamberlains in waiting rushed in with lighted torches and the King took a torch himself to investigate with. But he chanced to set fire to the bedclothes. In a moment the whole bed was ablaze, and the white louse, who on account of over-indulgence was slow in his movements, was burnt up together with the bed.
But Firejaws the flea had already hopped out of the window and journeyed on without a care in the world.
And the people listened to Elsaffan’s stories, and his pockets jingled with little silver coins, and the landlord of the Blue Lantern charged nothing for the wine he drank, since he attracted many people to the place. And on the evening when he told the story of the white louse the Duke of Callipasta himself was among the audience. And His Grace laughed so much that he almost choked on his wine.
And Elsaffan resolved that evening to try to find some more stories about fleas and lice; for he had noticed that stories of that kind always went down well with the people.
But when a week had passed, he went out to the old prophet in the wilderness.
‘Well,’ he asked, ‘have you conjured up anything for me now?’
‘Mm - yes,’ answered the old man, ‘that depends upon you. Are you courageous and quick-witted? Can you play a part from start to finish without doing anything out of character?’
‘I will try,’ said Hannes Elsaffan. ‘For the sake of the Princess Finissa I would try absolutely anything. But what sort of a part is it I am supposed to play?’
‘You must realize yourself,’ the prophet answered, ‘that a poor poet cannot have any chance with the Princess. For her you must appear as something exalted, something far more exalted than the Duke of Callipasta. You must appear as the War-God Boomboom!’
‘Saints preserve us!’ said Hannes, ‘how on earth could that be? Every little schoolboy knows from the catechism that the War-God Boomboom rides on a fire-spitting dragon. Where do I get one of those from?’
‘I have conjured it up for you. Take a look at this!’
The prophet uncovered and showed Hannes a big dragon with shining metal scales of emerald green.
‘Sit up on the dragon,’ said the old man.
Hannes obeyed.
‘Now turn that screw a little.’
He pointed to a screw in the dragon’s neck.
Hannes turned the screw, and the dragon slowly and
majestically unfolded two large black wings.
‘Now press that button just beside it. But hold tight! Keep firm hold of the steering - you steer him by his tail, and that is the control stick.’
The dragon rose up, slowly at first, then faster and higher, and flew about in great circles and flourishes wherever Hannes steered it. And the sun shone out through a cloud, and the cloud gradually came nearer and seemed to dissolve into mist.
‘This way,’ thought Hannes, ‘I could go right on up to heaven, but I don’t feel like it just at the moment.’
So he let the dragon down again and dismounted.
‘Thank you very much,’ he said, ‘but why doesn’t he spit fire?’
‘He can learn to do that if need arises,’ answered the prophet. ‘But it would be foolish to let fly with fireworks when you are paying a nocturnal visit to the Princess. That would not be appropriate to the situation.’
‘Do you not think,’ Hannes reflected, ‘that the War-God might be angry with me?’
I should scarcely think so. He is an old Don Juan himself, and I expect he would just laugh over the story if he ever got to hear of it. Anyway, I believe he is a long way away; he has never made his presence felt in my lifetime, nor in my father’s or grand-father’s.’
‘Some people say, down in the town, that you do not believe in the gods.’
‘Quite right, my boy; I do not believe in them. But I worship them and sacrifice to them, and that is enough. Everyone should do that; it is, at any rate, the safest way. For if the gods do not exist, then they can do us no harm; but if, contrary to all probability, they do exist and I offer them no sacrifices, then they will be steaming angry with me, and no man should lay himself open to that risk! That was taught already in my grandfather’s time by the wise prophet Pafnutius, who is known by the honorary title ‘the Pascal of Pelargonia’.
‘How very curious!’ said Hannes; ‘but do you not think I ought to take a present with me for the Princess Finissa?’
‘I have already thought of that, my lad. But it must be something unusual. Diamonds and long-tailed monkeys and openwork silk stockings and all such trash she has been thoroughly spoilt with; they would mean nothing to her. No, but now have a look at what I have devised.’
The prophet opened an old cupboard and took out something that looked like a bottle with a funnel to it.
‘You see,’ he said, T have discovered a method of storing human voices in bottles, so to speak. You stand here in front of the funnel and sing one of your best songs. Then you only have to turn this tap and the bottle will sing the song with precisely the same voice and expression as you! And it can sing that song as often as you like - in time the voice may come to sound a little cracked, but then everything in this world is subject to change...’
Hannes stood in front of the funnel and sang:
It breaks the heart
When lovers part;
Do not forget me,
Never forget me,
Leonora!
‘Leonora’ was the name under which he had sung the praises of Princess Finissa. And, as poets do, he had sung of both the ecstasy of love and the bitterness of parting before ever he had experienced them. Poets always have been accustomed to draw on these experiences in advance, and on others too...
‘Very good,’ said the prophet. ‘You really do sing beautifully and with feeling. You must give this bottle to the Princess so that she can hear your voice from it on the days
when you are not with her. Then she will be quite certain that you are a god.’
‘Thank you very much!’ said Hannes Elsaffan.
The next evening, an hour after sunset, when the stars had begun to shine in the Pelargonian sky, he rode on his dragon to the Princess’s copper tower. And he flew through the air, alone with the stars, while human beings were sleeping down below in the town, and he felt as though he were a god.
He stopped his dragon outside the Princess's balcony and knocked gently on the window. The Princess appeared inside with a pale, frightened face.
‘Open, Finissa,’ said Hannes Elsaffan. ‘For I am the War-God Boomboom!’
Princess Finissa had, like all princesses, received a deeply religious education and her devotion to the War-God was especially warm; at the time of her confirmation she had even been secretly in love with him. She therefore did not hesitate for a moment to open up when she saw the War-God Himself riding on his dragon.
Hannes tied up the dragon to the balcony and went in to the Princess, who fell upon her knees and worshipped him.
‘Rise up, my daughter,’ said Hannes. T am indeed the God of War, yet I love you and my love transforms me almost into a mortal man when I am with you. Furthermore, I cannot reveal myself to human beings without borrowing the form of a real, living man. At first I thought of visiting you in the form of Prince Callipasta; that would have been most proper, as your father has chosen him for your husband. But I found him altogether too much like a lumbering great fat clodhopper. And so I took instead a handsome young man of the people with a good figure; 1 blew out his soul and shut it up in this bottle, and then I dressed myself in his form.’
‘Lord,’ said Princess Finissa, ‘I have loved you and worshipped you for as long as I can remember. Is it really possible that you would have me for your wife?’
‘Certainly,’ said Hannes Elsaffan. ‘We shall wed after the manner of the gods.’
And they did so.
But when dawn was approaching, the Princess said:
‘Lord, what is the name of the man in whose form you have come to me, and what is his calling?’
‘He is a singer of songs,’ said Hannes. ‘I know not what he is called, but I heard him singing in the market place when I had gone down into the crowd, invisibly, in order to make my choice. But he is an excellent artist and he deserves more encouragement from the court and the nobility than he has had so far. He sings with all his soul - indeed, his soul can sing even though it is parted from his body. Would you like to hear?’
He took out the bottle and made it sing It Breaks The Heart.
The Princess was moved to tears.
‘Lord,’ she said, ‘I have a prayer to ask of you - please grant it! If you go down to the earth now at dawn and give back to the singer of songs his body and soul - who knows, some misfortune could always befall him, he might be killed or disabled, and on your next visit you would have to dress yourself in the form of some other man. And that would be a grief to me, I don’t really know why... Besides, it is only too likely that the singer of songs has some girl whom he loves after the manner of common folk, and I cannot bear to think of that. Oh Lord, let me keep the bottle with his soul.’
‘My beloved,’ replied Hannes, ‘how could I refuse a prayer from you?’ And before he mounted his dragon and left her, he bade her promise most solemnly to keep their secret:
‘All that touches the gods,’ he said, ‘must be veiled in secrecy. Our marriage therefore, must remain secret. You must not say anything about it, even to your parents.’
She promised this with a sacred vow. And in the morning at breakfast she took her mother aside and confided in her, under a promise of absolute secrecy, that the War-God Boomboom had visited her during the night, riding upon his dragon, and had taken her to wife after the manner of the gods. The pious Queen Pomponia hastened at once to King Pampus, who was still occupied with his morning toilet, and told him the news.
‘Hm!’ said the King. ‘Hm! This sounds very mysterious. But this kind of thing has been heard of before. And if it is really true that I have acquired the War-God as a son-in-law -then, brother Hampus of Lappatraskia, we shall come and speak to you in plain Pelargonian!’
The next evening after dark King Pampus and Queen Pomponia, together with the Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the High Priest and the Editor of the state newspaper, all hid themselves on the roof of the copper tower. And when all of them with their own eyes saw the War-God come flying on his dragon, and the High Priest had distinctly recognized his face, all doubt was dispelled. King Pampus held a state council in the middle of the night and in the morning orders for mobilization were issued and war was declared on the King of Lappatraskia.
Unfortunately, the War-God Boomboom had not been invited to attend the state council; nobody dared to disturb him in order to ask his opinion on the matter. Consequently, the war correspondents who followed the early stages of the campaign did not exactly have the impression that the War-God was on the Pelargonian side. King Pampus was defeated in three battles and he was forced, with the remnants of his army, to seek refuge behind the walls of his capital. There was a long siege. The garrison was decimated and supplies began to run out. And one night Princess Finissa said to Hannes Elsaffan:
T no longer know what to believe. Are you really the War-God? Why do you not help us against the King of Lappatraskia? Surely it would be quite easy for you - and by the way, I have never seen your dragon spit fire. Why doesn’t he do that?’
‘He is too clever,’ replied Hannes. ‘A fireworks display in the middle of the night would attract attention, and that is not the idea.’
But the next day Hannes went to the old man in the wilderness.
‘What shall I do?’ he said. 'I am a man and I have been pretending to be a god. I did not believe for a moment that the girl would keep the secret, but I really couldn’t have guessed that it would lead to a war! What on earth am I to do?’
‘It is quite simple,’ answered the prophet. ‘You have taken on a part and you have to play it to the end. And, what is more, I will help you. Do you have the dragon with you?’
‘Yes, here he is, the unlucky beast!’
‘Good. Now it is time for him to learn how to spit fire!’
The old man took a bundle of rockets and stuffed them down the dragon’s throat.
‘When you press that button,’ he said, ‘he will spit fire. But that is not enough; he must also be able to sing the national anthem. It was originally, as you may know, a hymn to the War-God.’
And the old man took a bottle like the one Hannes had given to Princess Finissa but much bigger, and he placed it into a hole in the dragon’s belly.
T have certain knowledge,’ said the prophet, ‘that the King of Lappatraskia is planning to storm the city tonight after dark. You must then mount the dragon, be the War-God and put him to flight. When you press this button the dragon will spit fire and when you pull this lever he will sing the national anthem. It will be a brilliant success.’
That evening Hannes Elsaffan sat at home with his old mother, and she told him stories, just as when he had been a child. She told him the story of The Purple Jackal:
A jackal was being hunted by dogs and took refuge in a dyer’s yard, where he jumped into a big vat filled with purple paint. When he came out again the dogs no longer recognized him but slunk away with their tails between their legs, as they were frightened by his bright colour. And when he returned to the woods the other animals did not recognize him either and could not believe that he was just an ordinary jackal. His bright colour filled them with fear and respect, and so they made him
their king and gave him fine banquets. He appointed the elephant to be his prime minister, the lion his commander-in-chief, and the ass his archbishop. But one evening at dusk, when he heard the howl of his brother jackals some way off, he could not resist joining in their cry. Then the other animals realized that he was just an ordinary jackal and so they fell upon him and tore him to pieces.
‘That served the stupid jackal right!’ said Hannes.
At that moment he heard the Lappatraskians sounding their war trumpets in the dusk. He rushed out and mounted his trusty dragon. With great thrusts of his wings he hurried to the spot where battle had already commenced and the enemy were charging ahead singing their battle-song Allons, enfants de Lappatraskia! And Hannes made the dragon spit fire in all the colours of the rainbow, and then he pulled the lever and the dragon sang, with a voice like a hundred bassoons, the Pelargonian national anthem, Ritsch, Ratsch, Filiboomboom-boom, Filiboomboomboom, Boomboom! And now that the Lappatraskians saw the War-God Himself coming against them, spreading fire and destruction, they panicked and fled pell-mell, and the Pelargonians pursued them and cut them down in great numbers, and King Pampas himself mounted his white horse and with his own hands made cutlets out of the King of Lappatraskia, though he was his blood cousin. And when the battle was won Hannes Elsaffan continued for a while to fly in great circles over the city, and the dragon spat out its last rockets and sang the national anthem and all the people rejoiced and wept with emotion.
‘This is the right moment for me,’ thought Hannes Elsaffan.
‘Now or never! I can’t go on playing the War-God Boomboom for ever. Now I will descend with my dragon into the palace courtyard and I will go straight up to the King and ask for Finissa’s hand. After my exploit today he can’t refuse me, that is unthinkable. For I have saved the capital city and all the kingdom.’
As he approached the courtyard he saw the King, the ministers and all the court come rushing out of the palace in
surprise and confusion. And when he landed with the dragon and set foot upon the ground they all threw themselves to the ground in silent, awe-struck adoration.
At the sight of this Hannes Elsaffan broke into a fit of wild, uncontrollable laughter.
The effect of this laughter was as sudden as it was unexpected. Everyone got up at once and stared at the War-God with astonishment and disapproval. For it was an article of faith in the age-old religion of the Pelargonians, handed down by their fathers and forefathers, that the gods never laughed, and no-one could imagine that even the War-God Himself would allow himself to laugh at the King. 'What sort of a specimen do you think you are?’ said the King.
‘Your Majesty,’ replied Hannes, ‘it is true that I am not the War-God but only the poor singer of songs Hannes Elsaffan. But I have put the enemy to flight, saved the capital city and all the kingdom, and I ask no reward but the hand of the Princess Finissa.’
The King went purple and stood there quite speechless for the whole of a minute.
T have never heard anything so impudent in all my life,’ he said. ‘A singer, an artist, a trickster - after my daughter’s hand! And what is that nonsense you talk about having put the enemy to flight? As if the whole army and all the people had not seen how I myself, riding on my white horse at the head of the cavalry, drove off the Lappatraskian devils! Can you even sit on a horse, you boorish tramp? Guards, lock up this villain! The State Council will investigate his affairs and pass judgment. And arrest the dragon, too! Have it examined by the priests, it must be some kind of witchcraft!’
The next day the State Council examined the case and passed judgment.
His Excellency, the Prime Minister, who was also Minister of Court Etiquette, of Justice and of War, expressed himself thus:
‘The matter is highly complicated. In my capacity as Prime Minister I consider that there are serious grounds for hanging
the accused in the interest of the state. However, as Minister of Court Etiquette, I consider that in deference to Her Royal Highness the Princess Finissa he should, prior to execution, be raised into the nobility. It is also my duty to consider the case as Minister of Justice, and from that point of view also find that this honour which I have proposed for him is well justified, for it has been established in the course of the trial that the accused - if we set aside the selfishness of his motives and the illegality of his methods - has, next to His Majesty the King, made the most effective contribution to the defence of our country. And finally, as Minister of War I consider that the man merits the State Medal for Valour, eighth class.’
The other members of the State Council agreed. The High Priest, who in his capacity as Minister of Ecclesiastical Affairs had a seat in the Council, added a request that the man should be hanged in secret so that the people would not become agitated. He considered that it might be highly dangerous for religion if the truth were to leak out. And he wished to have it recorded in the minutes that this was an important matter of principle.
The sentence was confirmed by the King and carried out at once. The King accordingly elevated Hannes Elsaffan to the nobility with the title von Drachenflucht, pedigree number 2345, and decorated him with the State Medal for Valour. He was then led out by the guard and hanged in a back yard.
*
Some months later the Princess Finissa, when she went to the river to bathe, attended by her maidens, chanced to find in the rushes a little casket made of bamboo canes daubed together with clay and pitch, and in the casket lay a handsome little baby boy. The Princess adopted the boy as her own child and gave him the name Filiboomboom.
Not long afterwards her wedding with the Duke of Callipasta was celebrated with all due pomp and ceremony, and they lived long and happily together. At times, when she
felt depressed, she would take out the bottle with Hannes Elsaffan’s soul in it and make it sing:
It breaks the heart
When lovers part...
But as years went by the voice began to sound a little cracked.