Churchyard Arabesque
Some years ago now - it was during the War - I was walking with Henning Berger one day in late autumn in a churchyard in Copenhagen. A hundred years ago the place was out in the depths of the country, far from the walls and ditches of the town, but now it is like a great oasis of peace and greenery in the middle of a busy quarter of the city, among department stores, factories and hostels.
We walked slowly along an endless avenue of tall, thin poplars. Now and then we stopped to read the names and inscriptions on the tombstones.
We had been talking about the War. Henning Berger was hoping that Germany would win. I was afraid that Germany would win and not hoping for anything. After a while we began to run out of conversation.
‘Look! ’ he said, pointing to a tombstone at the side of the path, ‘look - J. P. Jacobsen! But perhaps it isn’t the right one.’
‘No, I don’t suppose it is. He is sure to be buried at Thisted; that’s where he was born and where he died.And this grave is a good hundred years old anyway, you can see that.’
‘Yes, of course. What’s that relief on it? It reminds me of the Thorvaldsen period.’
It showed a naked young hero with helmet and sword and a ram’s fleece over his arm.
‘Jason with the Golden Fleece.’
‘Oh, so that’ll be a tanner buried there.’
We read the inscription. It was a tanner.
We walked on and stopped in front of another grave, also more than a hundred years old. A tall stone with a bronze medallion
showing the dead man, a veterinary professor, and under the medallion a large relief of the Diana of Ephesus with her twenty breasts. Rather curious in a Christian churchyard suddenly to come across that old fertility symbol that once gave St Paul such a lot of trouble at Ephesus...
‘How on earth does that come to be here?’ wondered Berger.
‘Goodness knows. Great is the Diana of the Ephesians, but I can’t say I’d heard about her services to veterinary science.’
‘She was the goddess of the hunt, so perhaps she was also goddess of the hounds,’ guessed Berger. ‘Maybe that is the explanation. But look at the old fellow in the medallion - do you see who he looks like?’
I saw no resemblance to anybody I knew.
‘It is Book,’ he said. ‘Can’t you see?’
I did what I could to find the likeness between the seventy year-old veterinary professor and the promising young critic, Dr Book. But I couldn’t.
‘You never can see things the same way as I do,’ he muttered, dark and gloomy like the autumn weather around us.
(I knew that the spirit of Saul used to descend upon him every time he thought of Book. It had been like that ever since Book, who had at one time written quite favourable reports about his books, had suddenly done to death a novel that Berger had had high hopes with. The book had unfortunately appeared too late for Book to read it in the Christmas rush; he had only managed to look through it a bit, and had guessed the conclusion - but guessed wrong! And then he had condemned the book on account of the feeble, banal ending which he himself had invented. Then, for the sake of consistency, he had continued in the same vein whenever he wrote about Berger.)
‘Besides, it’s really your fault,’ he burst out.
‘What do you mean?’ I asked.
‘It’s your fault Book keeps running me down! You should never have attacked him! Ever since you went for Böök I have been the poor devil that never gets a decent review in Svenska Dagbladet! Never! It’s as plain as a pikestaff: you never write anything, so he can’t get at you. So he goes for your friends
instead. We have to pay the costs of your war, and it’s damned expensive, I can tell you. Really I ought to send you a bill.’
‘Please don’t do that, Henning,’ I said. ‘I should be ruined.’
‘Yes, and it would serve you right. That’s quite an extravagance you’ve allowed yourself. Attacking a critic! And a critic in Svenska Dagbladet to boot! Anybody would think you had taken leave of your senses!’
T admit there may be something in what you say. But one can’t think of everything, you know. And I never dreamed, when I made that little joke about “Dr Look” a few years ago, that I would end up having to apologize to you for it...’
‘No, but now you’ve had your little joke and enough is enough! Do you know what I’m going to do now? Well, I shall tell you. I’m going to go right home and write a novel about you, or a column or something or other, and I shall run you down till you’re this high, and then I shall send it to Svenska Dagbladet\ Then we shall see whether or not I can get decent reviews again in that paper! ’
‘That’s an idea,’ I said. ‘Quite an idea! I shall be delighted to help you. That way we can fix things so that you don’t need to send me any bill. And in private we can be just as good friends as ever.’
‘ - Of course! I never dreamed of anything else! Let’s play a trick on that devil!’
It had started raining, a fine misty rain at first, and we hardly noticed it, but suddenly it began to tip down. We decided to seek shelter in the gateway of the chapel of rest, as the doors were wide open. A burial was just taking place; the service had started with a hymn and an organ piece. ‘Blessed, blessed!’ Inside the door there was a cleric, and he gave us each a copy of a printed sheet with the name of the deceased in a black frame and with the texts of the hymns that were to be sung. We sat down in an empty row of pews near the door. I read the name of the deceased: Eva Marta Kristina Ytterquist. Clearly a Swedish name. And one of the wreaths on the coffin had a blue and yellow ribbon. The plain coffin, the meagre wreaths, the tiny handful of mourners, everything seemed to indicate that this was a quiet life that had
come to its end. The words of the priest gave the same impression: a humble calling, loyalty in her little world...
The sermon was short, but there were hymns with many long verses, both before and after the sermon. The whole thing lasted the best part of half an hour, the rain passed over, and when the coffin was carried out to the singing of Ingemann’s lovely hymn ‘Fair is the earth, fine is God's heaven, lovely the pilgrimage of the soul’ the weak autumn sunshine entered under the thinning yellow foliage of the trees. And several large tears rolled down Henning’s cheek.
‘That hymn always has this effect on me,’ he said, as if apologizing, to an elderly gentleman who was walking beside us.
(For we naturally went along with the others down to the grave.)
‘Yes, it is a lovely hymn,’ the man replied in Danish. ‘But I can hear that you gentlemen are Swedish. So you have come over here to be at the old lady’s funeral? That really is a kind, friendly thought! Perhaps you will say a few words at the graveside?’
Henning Berger became somewhat embarrassed.
T don’t think I can,’ he said. T haven’t prepared anything.’
‘Oh, that doesn’t matter,’ said the kindly little Dane, ‘you can always think of something! It is so cold and empty when nobody says anything at the graveside. And I'm sure there’s nobody else here who will.’
We had already reached the grave. The priest cast his three scoops of earth upon the coffin in accordance with the ritual, just as in Sweden, and he read out the blessing.
The little man prodded Henning Berger in the side. ‘Now,’ he said, ‘now you must speak!’
I was on tenter-hooks. Henning Berger walked up to the little mound of earth beside the grave, hat in hand, and gazed down for a while upon the coffin, then he lifted his head again and looked out over the little group of mourners. And as he stood up there he looked - as in Herman Vedel’s portrait - like an important, dignified prelate.
Then he spoke: ‘Eva Marta Kristina! Three names you were given in holy baptism. When I think of Eva I see before me the
blossom of your youth. But that is long since withered and gone, and Eva is dead. Peace be with her. And when I think of Marta I see all the labour of your active life. For you worked and cared for many things, and afterwards you were weary and went to your rest. And now Marta, too, is dead.
‘But it is different with Kristina! For I know that she lives! As a good Christian you have entered in to the eternal life, Kristina! And we, who still must wander a little longer in this vale of tears, we do not say farewell, but au revoir, until we meet again.’
The speaker was rewarded with tears and warm handshakes when he came down. The priest thanked him and congratulated him like a colleague on the beautiful symbolism which he had found in the three names, which for many people would have seemed so ordinary...
And even I, old sinner as I am, was rather moved.