The Sonata of Errors
At a party given by a Danish family here in Copenhagen recently I heard three short stories which might be described as variations on one and the same theme, and I shall try to repeat them as well as I can.
A sonata generally has three movements, though admittedly they are not usually variations on the same theme. But it pleases me anyway to call this whole thing The Sonata of Errors. There is nothing particularly musical about it - nobody is likely to suspect me of lifting it from Beethoven. Another thing, and this is worse - the title doesn’t correspond properly to the contents, since I am not concerned with just any errors, but with errors of a quite special kind.
Our host was a wealthy (1 believe) and cultured dealer in antiques. Among the guests were his father-in-law, a gentle-mannered, dignified old priest, and then a grey-bearded (but not all that old) Swedish painter, a Norwegian lecturer in philosophy from Oslo University specializing in ‘the psychology of the subconscious’, and a bank clerk with a sharp, clean-shaven face. The other guests, including myself, may be regarded as supernumerary.
It began when the Norwegian lecturer showed us a letter which he had received that day from one of his colleagues in Oslo, a historian. The strange thing about the letter was the date: 17th November 1425. The year was written quite plainly. There was no question of the sender having written a nine that looked like a four (even if that is possible). And there was nothing in the letter to suggest any joke or mystification.
‘The fact of the matter,’ said the Norwegian philosopher, ‘is
quite simply that my old friend for some reason or other had the year 1425 on his mind when he dated this letter. I do not remember what happened in 1425, or whether anything at all happened. But my colleague would know, since he is a historian. Subconsciously he must have been thinking of that year and so he wrote it down, though of course he was quite sure at the time that he was writing 1925. This kind of case is by no means unusual, and I would be glad to hear if anyone else here present can cast any light on the subject from his own experience.’
(Thus we have the theme: now let us proceed to the variations.)
‘Yes, as it happens, I have an example,’ said the grey-bearded Swedish painter. ‘At one time, some thirty odd years ago, I was passionately in love with a girl. I fell for her so completely I could have married her, though I naturally didn’t have any money. I expect it would have cost...
‘But since I am in a foreign country I had better first explain that there is a quarter of Stockholm called Östermalm. A hellishly depressing quarter with a lot of straight, depressing streets, and one of them is called Kommendör Street. It is so depressing that I used to think of it as the typical Östermalm street. 1 come from farming stock in Småland and I didn’t like Östermalm, but it so happened that I was renting a room on Kommendör Street - it was facing north-east and could be used as a studio by a poor young devil of an artist.
‘One evening I had arranged to meet the girl in Kommendör Street, at a corner not far from my own front door. I had, of course, certain hopes - begging your pardon, pastor...
‘But she didn’t come. And yet she had promised so definitely! I paced up and down, up and down, for two whole hours. 1 paced up and down and I wept tears and I swore -begging your pardon, pastor! It was a cold, windy November evening and I had no overcoat. I had pawned that to get money for a bottle of wine and some fancy cakes and grapes and a French pear for the girl. But she didn’t come, the little devil -excuse me, pastor!
‘Possibly 1 had a bit of a chill already; the next day I was in bed with a temperature. Pneumonia! Straight off to hospital! Practically kicked the bucket! And when I came out of hospital I read in a paper that the girl was engaged. To a rotten cad that I vaguely knew.
‘Six years later we met at a party. I avoided her. But suddenly she was standing next to me in a window-recess and she whispered:
“‘Why didn’t you come?”
“‘Why didn’t I come? What do you mean? 1 was walking up and down Kommendör Street weeping and swearing for two hours! And I got freezing cold and caught pneumonia!”
“‘Kommendör Street? But you wrote and asked me to meet you in Östermalm Street! And that is where I was walking up and down in the wind and getting freezing cold, though perhaps not for two hours...”
‘You see, the fact is - there is another straight, boring, depressing street in Östermalm, and it really is called Östermalm Street. In my mind I had always thought of Kommendör Street as “the typical Östermalm street”. And so I had written Östermalm Street though I meant Kommendör Street! It’s strange to think that if I hadn’t made that slip my life would have been quite different. Better or worse, who knows? But different! ’
The lecturer specializing in the subconscious had taken out a notebook and was hastily writing something down.
‘Yes, my dear friends,’ said the old priest, ‘it really is strange how chance happenings that seem quite trivial can take hold of our lives and fortunes. Once, best part of twenty years ago, I myself had a mishap of a very similar kind, which could well have been the end of my career in the Church. But I am not sure I can tell the story. Ah, well - I am among good friends, who will understand and forgive me.
‘I am getting on for eighty years old. But at that time I was only a bit over sixty, and my grandchildren, Sofus and Juliane, who are now sitting in that corner grinning at me, were then only five or six years old and had never been to the Tivoli.
‘It was a fine Sunday in August in nineteen... let me think... yes, it was 1908. Yes, it was the same year as that unfortunate business with Alberti.
‘I was standing in the pulpit in my little church preaching as well as I could. Fortunately, there were not many people in the church. Well - unfortunately, I suppose I should have said. But for me it was fortunate - that time. The text on which I was preaching was Jesus’ words on the Cross to the repentant robber: “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, today shalt thou be with me in Paradise.”
‘We do not know the name of the repentant robber. I recall that I had lately read a novel by a French writer in which the repentant robber was called Gestas. That must be a mistake. In a few of the apocryphal gospels the repentant robber is called Demas and the unrepentant one is called Gestas. But as to what they were really called the proper gospels, which are in the Bible, have nothing to say.
‘Well, anyway, that has nothing to do with my story.
‘My daughter and her husband - our dear hosts here this evening - and their children Sofus and Juliane were spending that summer in the country up at Rungsted, but that Sunday, it was about the end of August, I was expecting them back in Copenhagen and in the evening we were going to the Tivoli with Sofus, who was six, and Juliane, who was only five. The dear little rascals had never been in the Tivoli before. I remembered the first Tivoli evening of my own childhood, it was a quite unforgettable experience, and I was rejoicing in advance at the way my little grandchildren would enjoy themselves. And these worldly, but really quite innocent thoughts were on my mind - I must, to my shame, admit it -while I was standing in the pulpit interpreting the words of the Gospel. And so it came about that I happened to end my sermon by having Our Lord on the Cross say to the repentant robber: “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, today shalt thou be with me in the Tivoli!”
‘As soon as I had said it I knew what I had said. And I can tell you without the slightest exaggeration that that was the
most dreadful moment in all my life. I didn’t dare to look at the congregation. I hid my face in my hands while I stammered and whispered the benediction.
‘I scarcely know how I got home. I was an old man - for even in those days I was no youngster - but I took a devious route through back alleys to avoid meeting people and to collect my thoughts. Never in all my life have I felt so lost and miserable. And when I was home I sat down at my desk straight away and wrote to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs. I confessed what I had said in my sermon - it was important to anticipate any reports from my congregation - and I explained the matter as well as I could. And at the end I declared I was willing, if it should be called for, to apply for dismissal from duty with pension.
‘After three months - for in the Ministry there is no haste over answering letters - I received a reply. The Minister, who was one of my old friends from university, did me the honour of a reply by his own hand. He wrote that, since not one of the few people in that congregation appeared even to have noticed my little lapsus, let alone taken offence at it, there was no occasion for any kind of action. Actually, I happen to have the letter with me. Here you are! It is the only letter I have ever received from a minister of state.’
(‘Granddad has always happened to have that letter with him for as long as I can remember,’ whispered Sofus to Juliane.)
‘As we probably all know,’ continued the old priest, ‘the Christian community, and the Church herself, up to a few centuries ago did not believe in just one devil, but in countless evil spirits which interfered in all the affairs of life, both great and small. And it cannot be denied that this belief has firm support in Holy Scripture; and furthermore, the Church has never repudiated that view - it has merely slipped out of Christian preaching, as if by itself, in more recent times. But I for my part have seen and heard and experienced a good many things which prevent me from rejecting that teaching. How, otherwise, are we to explain the phenomenon of “speaking with tongues”? It has happened many times, and it happened already
in St Paul’s time, that a man who was speaking with tongues, when “the spirit” had seized him, uttered the most terrible blasphemies and cursed Our Lord Jesus Christ - and afterwards had not the least idea what he had said. Must not that “spirit” have been an evil spirit? And what about my own case? Must it not have been a little trouble-making devil - a devil of mischief - that prompted me to say something I never thought nor meant and that I never dreamed l would be able to say from a pulpit?’
‘Yes, pastor,’ said the Norwegian lecturer, ‘I really don’t know what to say about it. The evil spirits which at one time were believed to cause diseases have in modem medical science taken on a kind of concrete form in the shape of bacteria. But we have not yet found anything corresponding to that in the science of psychology. But who knows? Perhaps that will come!’
‘Your health, professor!’ said the Swedish painter. ‘And yours, pastor! And let us drink the health of that trouble-making little devil! Here’s to that devil of mischief!’
I had thought for some time that I could tell from the face of the clean-shaven banker with the sharp features that he, too, had something to contribute — another variation on the theme. And I was quite right.
‘Unfortunately,’ he began with a thin but penetrating voice, ‘unfortunately I am not an artist, like our honoured guest from Sweden, nor am I a professional psychologist like our Norwegian brother, and I am not an eminent preacher like our distinguished old friend. I am just an ordinary bank clerk. But once, not so many years ago, 1 too experienced - though only as an accessory and a witness - an error of exactly the kind we are talking about. Quite a serious error, too, and not least from a banker’s point of view.
‘But, as I have said, I was not myself the one that made the mistake; and that is why I don’t really know where to begin. Our Swedish and Norwegian guests have presumably never heard of the writer Marius Krebs...’
‘Oh yes!’ said the Swedish painter. T have even read one of his books. But that was at least thirty years ago.’
‘Really? Well, he was quite a good writer in his day. He just happened to live twenty or thirty years too long. He had a few plays produced at the Royal Theatre at the beginning of the eighties. And he wrote three or four books which were read and discussed and even bought. In later years he wrote other books which were neither read nor bought and consequently were not discussed. And so he grew old and died in poverty and want ten years or so ago, as completely forgotten as if he had never lived.
‘But about a week before he died he had a letter from the bank where I have a rather junior appointment. In the letter there was a draft for 3,730 crowns and a short note from the bank stating that the sum cabled from such-and-such a bank in New York was to be paid to the writer Marius Krebs of 24 Forhaabningsholms Allé.
‘What did he think when that letter came? I cannot imagine. Perhaps he had a son or daughter in America. Or a grandson or granddaughter. Perhaps he thought that one of them might possibly have hit on the kind idea of sending him a thousand dollars. Or else - surely it was possible? - some American publisher was sending him that staggering sum as a courtesy honorarium for the translation rights of one of his books which the publisher had made a fortune with... Well, heaven knows what he thought! 1 can just picture him as he rubbed his bald head and tugged at his thin white beard. However it might be, he put on his Sunday suit and took a taxi, which he had no money to pay for, and drove to the bank.
‘It was my counter at the bank that he came to collect his money from. I took the draft and examined it back and front. It was in order. And I had known Marius Krebs by sight for many years - he was an old Copenhagen character - and so there was no need of any proof of identity. I counted out the money. Marius Krebs had only to pick it up and stuff it into his wallet, if he had one, and then to leave.
‘But that is not what he did. Instead, he asked:
“‘Excuse an old man’s curiosity, sir. But tell me, where does this money come from?”
T had just returned to duty that day after several weeks’
holiday which I had spent in Norway. I therefore knew nothing about it and I had not seen the cable from New York.
‘“I am afraid I cannot say,” I replied. “But it must have been in the letter from the bank which you had with the draft.” “Yes,” he said. “It says ‘by cable’ - from a bank in New York that I have never heard of. But I would like to know who it is that is sending me the money. Does it say in the cable, perhaps?”
‘He showed me the notification from the bank. It was one of our usual printed letters, on which the name and the amount had been written in. Looking at the words in ink, I recognized at once Miss Iversen’s handwriting.
“‘Miss Iversen,” I said, “would you show us that cable from New York about a payment of 1,000 dollars to Mr Marius Krebs, please? Mr Krebs would like to see it.”
‘Miss Iversen stared at me with big, frightened eyes.
“‘To... to Mr Marius Krebs?”
“‘That’s right!”
‘Her whole face went red and her hands shook as she fumbled among the papers in the file where the cable ought to be.
“T can’t find it,” she whispered.
‘Suddenly she burst into tears and ran away.
‘As we discovered later, she ran and hid in... well, in the only place where a girl can hide for a while when she is in a desperate tight comer.
T looked through the file where the cable should have been myself. True enough, it wasn't there. Instead I found a cable from the New York bank authorizing payment of 1,000 dollars to Mr Marius Kristensen. A well-known film writer. Now it was my turn to feel a strong urge to run away and hide. Personally, of course, I had nothing to reproach myself with, but I still felt dreadfully ashamed. On the bank’s account. One always feels some degree of solidarity with an institution where one has worked for many years. And an error of the kind that had clearly arisen in this case simply cannot occur in a bank.
‘And how in the world was I to explain the situation to Mr Marius Krebs? I asked him to take a seat while we looked for the cable. It would soon turn up, I lied.
‘Marius Krebs trotted across to a bench and sat down. His trusting, child-like eyes stared, perhaps in bewilderment, at the cubist wall-paintings in the bank chamber. Our bank always did pride itself on keeping abreast of the times.
‘I sent a young lady to look for Miss Iversen. Finally she appeared, pale and tear-stained. I showed her the notification from the bank which she had filled in - with the name of Marius Krebs - and the cable from New York with Marius Kristensen’s name. She explained as well as she could. She had lately, by sheer chance, been reading an old book by Marius Krebs and it had made a deep impression on her. And so, without knowing what she was doing, she had written Krebs instead of Kristensen.
‘Mr Marius Krebs made his way to the counter. “Excuse me,” he said, “but 1 have a taxi waiting outside. It has been waiting now for over half an hour. That is going to be expensive. And the only money I have is what I am going to draw with this draft... What about the cable? Has it been found yet?”
“‘Well, yes, in a way, Mr Krebs,” I replied. “But... the fact is, one of our young lady assistants has made a most distressing and unfortunate mistake.”
‘I showed him the cable and repeated Miss Iversen’s explanation. And as to the taxi, I asked him to permit a young man on our staff, who could be spared for the moment, to travel home with him and pay the driver.
‘I had naturally been afraid that the old man would have a terrible shock. But instead he took it with a sense of humour.
“T thought something must be wrong,” he said. “I have never been lucky with money. But would you mind if I ask which of my books it was that the young lady had been reading? Would it be Margrete Hill by any chance?”
“‘Yes, Mr Krebs, that was the book,”, sobbed Miss Iversen.
‘The old writer’s face lit up. “Really?” he said, “was it really?”
‘And the next day Miss Iversen received a copy of Margrete
Hill with the author’s dedication and a little bouquet of tall daisies and bluebells.
‘About a week after that I saw a little notice in Politiken that the writer Marius Krebs was dead. Well, we all have to die, and I don’t suppose that episode had anything to do with it. But Miss Iversen thought otherwise. She dressed in black for a whole month, and for years afterwards she always went to his grave on the anniversary of his death with a little bouquet of tall daisies and bluebells.’
There was a little pause.
‘Yes,’ said the Swedish painter, ‘that is the way things can happen sometimes. Mostly in little matters, of course - but what are little matters and what are big ones? And who knows if, perhaps, Our Lord, when He created this world, really intended something quite different?’