The Stove That Wasn’t Real
In the autumn evenings when the first fires were lit my father sometimes used to amuse us children, and perhaps himself as well, by playing with the fire. When the flames had burnt down he would build a castle in the embers with an empty cigar-case and a few match-boxes, and a wad of thick cartridge-paper would make a tower. For a long time the whole splendid construction would stand smouldering gently before the fire really took hold. But then! Nero could hardly have derived more joy from the burning of Rome that I had from these improvised little fires in the autumn evenings. A serious educationist would perhaps disapprove of this kind of pleasure: the child must get the idea that a grand blaze was the finest thing in the world, and I have often in later years been surprised at this imaginative streak in my father, who was otherwise always so proper and respectable. And I was, in fact, not a little put out when I heard one morning that the German Church had burnt down during the night while I was asleep. But fortunately I was fully compensated soon afterwards by seeing the big fire at the Steam Mill. I was walking with my father through the old town one winter evening when we saw a bright glow in the sky. My father had the keys to his office in the Treasury, in the south wing of the old Kungshus Building on Riddarholm Island; he took me there with him and we watched the big fire,
the finest blaze Stockholm has had in my time, as we looked out from the big, round room in the tower, the conference room, which had been a council room in Frederick l’s time. Great flocks of pigeons, which the fire had made homeless, were flying in wide circles over the blaze, and the sharp red light they reflected made them look like flickering sparks thrown up from the fire.
After that I suppose I was no longer quite so impressed with our little fires in the tiled stove at home. But, anyway, it was playing with the fire and the dying embers like this on autumn evenings that gave me my first childhood impressions of what we used to call ‘atmosphere’ - a word that now, perhaps, has been cheapened by too much use. And so I developed a rather special affection for the old stove.
And that is why it came as something of a shock to me when, some years later, at the age of sixteen, I was initiated to the school of philosophy which was then called ‘pure idealism’ (no doubt it still is so called in the history of philosophy) and I was led by this to doubt the very existence of the stove.
A young relative, the son of somebody who had been married to a cousin of my father’s (both the parents were dead) came to stay with us. He was five or six years older than me and a student at Uppsala, and since he lived in a remote place in the country I had never met him before. His name was Albert. The difference in rank and age between a student and a schoolboy is far greater than between a professor and a student. I therefore felt deeply flattered when Albert spoke to me as to an equal and honoured me with long talks about deep philosophical questions. He explained to me that the stove, in which a freshly-lit birch-wood fire was blazing away, only existed ‘within me’, that is to say in my mind.
‘But doesn’t it also exist within you?’ I asked, ‘in your mind?’
‘Certainly,’ he said. ‘For me it exists only within me, just as for you it exists only within you.’
‘But for me, surely, it can’t exist only within me, because I know that it also exists within you, and within mother and father, and within Lotta who lit the fire.’
‘For you,’ answered Albert, I exist only within you, in your own mind. And it is just the same with your mother and father and Lotta the maid. What you know or think you know about my mind or other people’s minds, all that really exists only in your own.’
And he explained at length how everything which we call the external world, the objects around us, things and people and animals, the sun and the moon, the stars and the earth, were nothing more than the contents of our own minds. It is not possible to know anything at all about whatever exists outside our minds — if anything exists at all. But learning cannot concern itself with that which it is impossible to know, and for philosophy, which is the highest kind of learning, the contents of the mind must therefore be the only reality. Outside of our mind there is no reality to be found, or even imagined, for in the very moment when I imagine something, that ‘something’ already exists in my mind.
I gave the matter a little thought. His line of argument struck me as perfectly correct and at the same time quite crazy. But I could not sort out in a hurry what was correct about it and what was crazy.
‘Father,’ I said, ‘how old would you say this house is?’
‘Let me think,’ said my father. It was built when I was at secondary school. So it must be something like forty years old.’
‘So the man who made the stove must be dead by this time, otherwise we could ask him. The stove must have existed in his mind before he constructed it: he knew what it was going to be like. At any rate it is possible that it did not turn out exactly as he had conceived it in the first place. And in that case he must have been forced to alter the idea of the stove in his mind as he was working on it. How are you going to account for that if you will not allow that something from a reality outside his mind caused him to alter the idea of the stove that was in his mind? Besides, the man who made the stove surely had a much clearer idea than we have about how the stove is constructed internally: could that perhaps be because he was working with a reality
that is now known to us?’
I thought, of course, that I was handling this rather well. But Albert was not of the same opinion.
‘I don’t know whether you have done any logic at school,’ he said. ‘If you have then you may remember that there is a kind of error called the ‘circular argument’. It consists of presupposing what you are trying to prove. You base your whole argument on the assumption that there is a reality outside your mind, and in that way you think you have proved its existence. The reality of the stove does at least to some extent have the appearance in its favour, since you can see it with your own eyes at this moment - and so you try to prove its reality by means of the stove-maker’s reality, even though you have probably never in all your life seen a stove-maker.’
‘But tell me, Albert,’ said my father, ‘do you not yourself, in ordinary matters, when it is not a question of philosophy, make a certain distinction between real and not real?’
‘That is a practical necessity,’ replied Albert. ‘Our consciousness is by nature so constituted that we necessarily have to regard some things as real and some other things as not real. But it does not follow from that that any such difference exists in reality.’
‘I thought you said just now,’ I resumed, ‘that the contents of our mind are the only true reality. But now you concede that there is in our mind a difference between real and not real. Our mind presumably has some reason for making that distinction. I had a certain idea of you before I had seen you. I knew you were a student. I also have an old photograph of you where you are a little boy with short trousers and curly hair. In a dark comer of my mind I therefore imagined you at one time as a very small student with short trousers and curly hair. But now that I have met you I have been compelled to abandon the picture of you that was in my mind: you are not short, but on the contrary rather tall, and you do not have short trousers or curly hair. What is it that has forced me to abandon my old image of you and replace it with a new one? Could it not possibly be my coming into contact with a reality that existed
outside my own mind before it entered into it?’
I do not recall what Albert said to that, but I expect it was something very profound, and we continued our dispute for a long time without coming to any conclusion. I never saw him again; some years after that he died as a result of an accident. If he had lived he might well have one day become the great philosopher which our country, unfortunately, has never yet produced.
King Gustav Vasa’s farewell speech to the Estates is, as we know, not an entirely dependable verbatim record, and I also cannot be absolutely sure that my second cousin Albert and I on that occasion said in just those words everything that is written down in this little philosophical dialogue - which in any case is just about as foolish as some of the dialogues of Plato.